                        MGM:
KZSU Stanford, 90.1 FM. I'm Mark Mollineaux. This is the Henry George
Program. A show all about land, policy, and politics. Today on the
program, we're going around the Bay Area, going to our neighbors to
the north, up in Marin County, and hearing what goes on up there. We
have two guests on. We have Jenny Silva from the Marin Environmental
Housing Collaborative, and Warren Wells of the Marin County Bicycle
Coalition. So we'll hear all about Marin from the
housing/transportation angle and much more. Let's just get into it.
So, Warren and Jenny, thank you so much for making here today.

                    Jenny Silva:
Thanks for having us.

                   Warren Wells:
Thanks for having us, Mark.

                        MGM:
Yeah. So before we introduce you all: Marin County. I think it's
nationally famous. It's one of those things that kind of when people
think of San Francisco, it's the neighbors to the north, blah, blah,
blah, blah. But what is your main pitch for understanding Marin from
an outsider's perspective if you aren't really keyed into all the
details?

                    Jenny Silva:
I think the most basic thing to think about Marin is it is the home of
conservation. It's really where the national conservation movement
kicked off, and that has really impacted housing and land use really
since the back in the 60s. There was a major development called
Marincello that was going to be done with 30,000 units. And very
famously, Marin rose up and successfully fought it. And it really has
squashed everything since then. In the last five decades, we've been
the slowest developing county of all the counties in the Bay Area. So
it's a place where people are really proud of their environmentalism
and haven't really realized how much it's impacted the community.

                   Warren Wells:
And just to add on to that, so I work for the Bicycle Coalition in
Marin, and Marin is an interesting study in contrast in that regard.
It's actually the home of mountain biking. It's kind of where the
sport of mountain biking was invented. And it really is kind of a
paradise for riding recreationally, but it is a place where riding for
transportation actually, they've made some great investments, but
really is still a challenge compared to San Francisco or Berkeley or
Davis or other places that have made more focused investments. And it
is a place where there's a great deal of very vocal opposition to
reconfiguring roads to make them more bicycle or pedestrian friendly.
So again, you have this sort of study and contrast between being the
home of mountain biking, but also a real challenge toward progressive
policies in that regard.

                        MGM:
So I think from a perspective, I always had a take that's kind of
tongue in cheek, which is, as Jenny was saying, the founding mythology
of modern Marin County is Marincello, defeating this plan to develop
the headlands and saving nature. And honestly, I say, yeah, that's
great. My biggest question, Marin, it's like, okay, so if it's all
about preserving nature, why do people live there? Why don't we just
make it all preserve. And I guess as people who live in Marin, maybe
I'll put you on the spot, say what is the case for people living in
Marin? What is the future of Marin where people in nature can coexist
instead of it being just nature?

                    Jenny Silva:
Well, we are part of one of the largest economies of the world. I
don't think we really have a choice to pretend that we're not part of
the Bay Area. But I would say that there is not necessarily a conflict
between open space and housing. What I always say to people is you can
have two of the three things. You can have open space, you can have
low density or you can have affordable housing. And Marinites haven't
really come to terms that they can't have all three. And I actually
think there are a lot of people in Marin who would choose to have the
open space and higher density if they can have affordable housing. But
right now we just always fight the high density and we fight for open
space. So we've ended up with very unaffordable.

                   Warren Wells:
Housing and American settlement and Marin is quite old. It was based
around rail infrastructure and the ferries and there is a substantial
amount of Marin that is pretty relatively densely developed as far as
US suburbs go. And I think that the case can be made again, like Jenny
was saying, that just densifying those places, you could get a lot
more than Marin's quarter million people in it and still keep the rest
of the headlands and West Marin looking the same as they do today.
Which Jenny and I were talking about this the other day. I think one
can struggle with this balance here. I think we need more housing in
all of California and Marin in particular. But I don't want to see a
bunch of tract housing in West Marin and the Headlands. I mean, it is
something I think that open space is something that one can enjoy. I
think the Headlands are some of the most beautiful it's like kind of
one of the most beautiful places. And incredibly, it's great to have
this like, nature access so close to one of the biggest population
centers in America, San Francisco. People really can walk or bike or
drive across the Golden Gate Bridge and be there in the Headlands in
minutes. But I think that Marin shouldn't shirk its share in terms of
actual housing production. But there's plenty of places to do it.
There's plenty of flat, like one story residential in the rest of the
county.

                    Jenny Silva:
Well, there's two related facts I always like to share with people.
I'm just outside of Sausalito, and Sausalito currently has a
population of about 7000 people and it's actually been declining. But
in World War II they actually had a population of 30,000 people. So
the idea that we are full and we can't add more people is just not
historical. The second thing I like to point out is if we had the
density of Paris, we'd have almost 100,000 people living in Sausalito.
So there's a lot more room before we start invading the open space of
Marin.

                        MGM:
I think that the second question is as far as okay if you say okay,
Marin is part of the Bay Area. It's a real pain that isn't better
connected. Warren was saying you can bike and walk if you happen to be
right at the headlands, but most don't. So as far as people flowing in
and out of the county, there's many tens of thousands. 16,000 people?
No, it's 29,000 people work in San Francisco, live in Marin. But of
that, 16,000 of those people drive a car alone to get to work. 5000
take a bus, 5000 take ferries, but wide majority are cars. And I think
when you talk about people coming from the East Side past San Quentin,
coming from Contra Costa, that's pretty much all car traffic. It's a
real missed opportunity. We didn't get Bart across the bridge back in
the day. As the population grows, is it going to be better connected
or how are we going to manage this?

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, it's a great question. The original Bart plan for the Bart
District, back in the early, late 50s, early 60s, when the original
planning was being done, was to have Bart cross the Golden Gate Bridge
into Marin. And as legend has it, it was Marinites that blocked it,
which is actually at least per the official history of Bart. Not true.
It seems that the Golden Gate Bridge District were the ones who kind
of sabotaged that effort. Probably because they didn't want
competition for bridge revenue. Because the way the bridge district
exists is by having tens of thousands of cars cross it every day. So
they funded this additional study that showed that the bridge wouldn't
be able to have Bart running on it. And obviously, it's too deep to do
another tube under the Golden Gate Strait. That's just a bit of
history. I think you're right that the connections are not great. We
have ferries from Tiberon, Sauslido and Larksborough, which are great
when they're running, but they're not incredibly frequent. There's no
rail transit between Marin and the Bay. There was much more frequent
commuter bus transit over the Golden Gate Bridge run by the Golden
Gate Bridge district. Some of that has commuter bus has been killed by
the Pandemic. So many people who were commuting by bus are now working
from home several days a week.

                        MGM:
Off hand, there's a bridge fare, there's a toll one way, which is
pretty reasonable to take the bridge by car. But the cost of the fare
for the commuter bus is $16 round trip. Kind of as a baseline. Sure,
if it's more expensive, I get why people drive.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah. And it's the same thing for the Richmond SANFL. It's about twice
as expensive to take a bus in both directions. As is to drive. There's
just this whole one going one direction. And I guess with maybe it's
more defensible with the Richmond SANFL because they have two
different agencies, but Golden Gate Bridge District runs both the
buses that cross it and the tolls, and that's a choice for them to
say. As it is, the bus is subsidized by the car traffic. But the
degree to which the subsidy that they do that subsidy is up to them.

                        MGM:
But what is the future as far as construct? Let's say that you really
explode the population in the dense urban centers of Marin. How do you
manage people going in and out? Is there going to be a massive
infrastructure project?

                   Warren Wells:
Well, I think more people go. I mean, I could look this up real quick
if we want to. I think more people go into Marin every day or moving
into Marin to work than going out. And at least the people who are
going into Marin are people who are much less likely to be able to do
their work remotely. So there's this inflow outflow. Probably every
county has a lot of people coming in and out. I think that we need to
have a lot more bus service, certainly over the Richmond Santa Fe
Bridge than there is today. I think that with electrification or
hydrification of ferry service, we could see a lot more higher
frequency ferry service. And then I think part of that is also just
densification of the flats near those transit hubs. You look at
Larksburg Ferry, no one lives near it. There's a 20 acre parking lot.

                        MGM:
I took it once. That's the only ferry I've taken. I took it once just
as, like kind of as a goof to say, oh, let's see what this is about.
Someone else. We're at Larksburg. It's like, okay, we saw Larksburg
big parking lot.

                   Warren Wells:
Let's see. Yeah, there's a huge parking lot, and then some apartments
kind of passed commercial development, and then really, no one else
lives near it. And then, Jenny, you can fill me you can fill in on
this, because there was, like, a Larksburg specific plan that got beat
back by the city council or people this is like 2015, 2016. There was
a plan to densify near there, but it didn't happen.

                    Jenny Silva:
Yeah, and I don't know about that plan, but I do know that in the
Larksburg housing element that's being reviewed right now, there are
plans to build a lot more housing around the ferry terminal, and that
is a great opportunity. But as Warren says, a lot of the traffic is
coming in to work there, and a lot of the push is to build more
affordable housing. And I think most teachers, most bankers, most
people that are doing the sort of jobs that you can't afford to live
in Marin now, if they had an opportunity, would prefer to do that over
commuting from Alameda or Richmond or many of the places where people
commute from.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I pulled up some I think it's like 14,000 coming from Contrast
and then Alameda and there's 16,000 coming down from Sonoma and
there's a lot of people going in their way, but I'm remiss let's
finally get to who are you folks? So just kind of a brief
introduction, also how you got active in it. Let's start with Jenny.
Introduce yourself and kind of what got you to kind of be active in
the space, I'm sure.

                    Jenny Silva:
So I'm Jenny Silva. I'm the board chair of the Marin Environmental
Housing Collaborative, which is a group in Marin that advocates for
more affordable housing with an environmental and racial justice lens.
And I've been involved with the group for a couple of years now. And I
really got involved in the space from a lifetime of following housing
and seeing the problems, lack of housing causes and then much more
actively after I went through a divorce and was really surprised at
how someone with a lot of resources could have such a terrible time
finding a place to live. And so once some time opened up in my life
where I could spend more time advocating, this is what I chose to
advocate for. Warren and I met on Twitter, and I think we've come to
share a lot of similar ideas about land use, but from different
angles. So, Warren, why don't you introduce yourself?

                   Warren Wells:
Thanks, Jenny. Yeah. So, I'm Warren Wells. I'm the policy and plan
director for the Marin County Bicycle Coalition in my day job, and I
also serve on the board of the Marin Environmental Housing
Collaborative along with Jenny. So actually, Jenny, maybe I might have
sent you an email after one of your after an article you wrote in the
IJ, but maybe I DM'd you on Twitter. I work as a professional bike
lobbyist. And actually, just full disclosure, I do live in the East
Bay. I live in Berkeley and commute to Marin, typically over the
Richmond Sanital Bridge one or two days a week, sometimes over the
Golden Gate if I'm going to saucely down. So I've worked in bike
advocacy for two and a half years after working in private
transportation consulting there. Learned a lot, but really want to
start doing more advocacy because it matters, as opposed to kind of
being a bit more BS in the consulting field and on the housing front.
You know, I I've been kind of working as a I don't know if I'm heavily
cost burdened right now. My wife wasn't working for a number of months
when we had our first baby, so we're definitely cost burdened at that
point. Cost burden renter, living in a missing middle home that
couldn't be built today. And I guess since I moved to California and
started getting plugged into conversations around housing and land
use, you can't help but be annoyed at it. And then I read Conor
Doherty's book and started following cal YIMBY. And starting to do
more volunteer advocacy. And then Jenny and I connected again, I think
be an article she wrote and Twitter and had some conversation around
what's going on in Marin. And Jenny invited me to join the board of
the Environmental Housing Collaborative.

                        MGM:
Okay, so you've never been a resident, but you've treated Marin as a
place to work and found it a meaningful place to do advocacy for that
reason. That's pretty cool. Yeah.

                    Jenny Silva:
And I've always believed if you can make change on housing in Marin,
you can make it anywhere. So I feel like we're a good test case for
making things happen.

                        MGM:
Yeah. You could say the population isn't big, but it is an ideological
powerhouse of the NIMBY, so perhaps it's important for morale to do
work there. Okay, so drilling down into kind of the politics of Marin.
Marin has many incorporated cities and towns and a lot of
unincorporated areas meaningfully. What is a pecking order? San Rafael
is a county seat in the biggest city. Right. But how much is San
Rafael, the real core of Marin County, and how much these other areas
matter? And what's the kind of, I guess, solar system of different
cities and communities?

                    Jenny Silva:
I would probably say Marin County. Unincorporated is more of the core
of Marin, and you really can't look at any one jurisdiction. I think a
lot of what makes Marin Marin is the fact that we've got twelve
jurisdictions for 260,000 people. It's a lot of government for not a
very big population, and it's made local control very effective for
the NIMBYs.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah. Obviously all the land use policy does get decided at a
municipal level. And like Jenny was saying, there are eleven
incorporated cities and then the county, which range there's kind of
the three big ones. There's Santafel, which is 60,000, and you have
about 50,000 people in both the city of Nevada and in unincorporated
county. And the remaining 100,000 people are kind of distributed
between the smaller cities. I do think that people looks to the
county, again, like Jenny was saying that the Board of Supervisors
only controls land use within unincorporated Marin, but I feel like
they loom large. And the Board of Supervisors all have automatic seats
on the Transportation Authority of Marin, which is the county
transportation agency, which ends up having they'll be the ones who
are they'll be writing letters of support or opposition to certain
bills, kind of involving land use and transportation as well. So the
county supervisors bat above their weight, even though they don't
oversee land that has more population. Even though Santa Fe is a
larger population.

                        MGM:
San Rafael is also it's a city with a coherent shape and everything
else unincorporated. It seems wild to read more about it, the fact it
has luxury resort towns and then it has what are the insofar as there
are marginal communities hanging on in Marin, it seems like the best
example is Marin City, which is unincorporated confusingly. Yeah. And
it sounds like a lot of the battles have to do with the fact that the
unincorporated areas what is stopping them from making the marginal
communities a punching bag? And it seems like they kind of are. I
don't know. I mean, this is a question. Let's get into housing
elements. What is stopping Marin from putting all the housing in kind
of the last remaining minority communities and say, okay, we did our
job. How is this looking? How is this all developing? And how is
housing elements coming around, especially for unincorporated Marin?

                    Jenny Silva:
There is a tension there, but the folks in Marin City are also
organized. I would say we have probably put more housing in the
housing element in Marin City than we should have. But you can't look
at the housing element and say that Marin County put everything into
Marin City. They did not. Like I said, I would have put less there.

                        MGM:
I guess, like Balinas, for example, is way out of the way. Of course,
that's a terrible place to put it. Where are the better places? Or I'd
say at least balance it? Where would you balance it more? In
unincorporated Marin, all of the supervisors.

                    Jenny Silva:
Represent an area, and there was a lot of horse trading between what
was fair in the different regions. And so when you look at the end
result, it ends up being pushed between the different supervisors
districts, according to the land that was there, and Marin County, for
as much as it fights development, there are a lot of places where
housing can be built, especially in unincorporated Marin. And there's
a piece of land, St. Vincent's, where the Catholic Charities have been
trying to build affordable housing for decades now. We could have
easily put the entire Marin County allocation into St. Vincent's. I
think it's 680 acres. It's a very large piece of land, and it's just
right outside of San Rafael, so there are plenty of places where Marin
County can do it. It's spread a bit, I think, mostly for district
representation reasons.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah. And actually, I was wondering if we wanted to have a quick gloss
on what Marin City is for people who are not sure.

                        MGM:
I think the more hand holding, the better.

                   Warren Wells:
Jenny, do you want to tackle the history of this or, like, just some
kind of, like, high level gloss on history of Marin City?

                    Jenny Silva:
Sure. And we should also recognize that the Canal is also a
marginalized community within Marin that is very important, and that's
in San Rafael and District Two of unincorporated Marin. But Marin City
is a historically black area in Marin. It's right outside of
Sausalito. It was formed after World War II when the shipyards closed,
and many black individuals had migrated from the south to California
to work in the shipyards. And after the shipyards closed, there was no
place that they could move to. Most of marin had redline deeds. And so
they couldn't buy housing. They couldn't rent anywhere, and they were
really pushed into Marin City. The World War II housing was torn down
and then some affordable housing projects built there. And so there
are multi generations families living in Marin City, but it's still a
marginalized community and still underresourced. And I should add with
it, the history there is really ugly. And Marin has a very liberal
reputation. And if you look at Marin City, it really shows more of the
truth of the matter. But the Sausalito Marin City School district was
desegregated just three years ago. It was the first desegregation
order that the state had made in 50 years. And so there is a really
ugly history in Marin that is often not recognized.

                   Warren Wells:
And Marin City, the built environment in Marin City, you can see it
from space. The entirety of Marin City, again, which is not a city, it
is just an unincorporated community, is physically separated from the
rest of the county by US 101. There is a single road in and out of
Marin City that goes through the interchange with 101. And other than
that road, there is no way to get there besides a few unpaved fire
roads up in the hills behind it. This road that's called Donahue,
floods occasionally, sometimes making it nigh impossible to leave the
neighborhood. And also, there's just the fact that everyone who lives
there is also right next to 101, which is just so their air is
polluted by tens of thousands of people commuting down from the rest
of Marin and Sonoma into San Francisco every day.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I think you talk about the ugly parts of segregation and
everything else. I mean, this could become a surprise to many. I
think. Marin certainly has this kind of granola, righteous kind of
reputation, which I think if you take the good faith of Marin's
ideology, you'd say, oh, they didn't realize that the smallest
beautiful mindset can still, in the long term, entrench segregation
and doing nothing is not enough. But I've been used to years of just
seeing a lot of explicit and ugly stuff at a Marin, too. I've been a
big fan of the Save Marinwood blog. Lovely guy who he's the guy who
posts Ms 13, folks. And just he has a whole section on affirmatively
furthering fair housing and why it's evil to attack the suburbs for
their choice to be white Dick Spotted Wood, his legendary guy who just
writes op eds. They were cheering on the Trump administration because
they were looking to end AFFH. And some people were very, very happy
to jump into bed saying, oh, I love the MAGA movement if it preserves
the Marin suburbs. But is that like a minority among views or how
often we get people to say, oh, yeah, I think he's speaking some truth
there?

                   Warren Wells:
Jay, maybe I'll just defer to you to answer the question I can follow.

                    Jenny Silva:
Up if I wanted to hear your thoughts on it.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, what I'll say is I think that's certainly the minority I mean,
Save Marin Wood and the people who are the kind of professional
NIMBY's, I think are pretty few and far between in terms of people in
Marin. I think that I would agree with 90% on people on, again, like,
national politics, stuff around like guns and abortion, but all
politics is local, especially land use politics. And I think that
there are a lot of people who again, this is a charitable reading, and
maybe I'm being too naive, but I think there are a lot of people I
don't know, like, talking to my friends and their parents of a certain
generation who just kind of, like, have kind of slept, walked through
this world and got a house. And now in the 80s, when it was relative,
it was still pretty cheap. Like, Marin wasn't incredibly expensive, I
should say. Full disclosure, my wife's parents live in Ren, and they
have a house that was in Nevada, which was not expensive at the time
they bought it, and it's now worth a whole lot more. Everyone is a
hero of their own story. No one thinks, oh, my, supporting our City
council's zoning regime is furthering segregation elsewhere in the Bay
Area. If you start thinking of that, then kind of everything falls
down around you. Most people just don't. But I take a positive spin on
it. I think people are reading the articles in The New York Times
about the history of zoning in California and starting to have some
people are starting to have different views. Jenny and I were talking
about how there are and more people now showing up to contentious
meetings about proposed developments. They're still the people who are
coming there and complaining about the shadows and the parking lot,
the parking and the traffic. And then there are people who, like,
neither of us know who are showing up and saying, I think this should
happen. Sounds great, and then sitting back down. And so I think that
there are people who are starting to see the bigger picture in this,
but I'll pass it over.

                    Jenny Silva:
Jenny yeah, and I would agree with that. And there are definitely the
dick spots, and there are definitely the people who are taking it as
their life work to prevent change from happening and don't care about
the segregated outcomes that they're pushing. But when I was on the
Sausage Lido Housing Element Advisory Committee, I spoke to just about
everybody who wrote in, and the vast majority of people really do want
to see more affordable housing. They just haven't gone through the
thought process of if we keep the open space and we keep everything
low density, there's nowhere to put the affordable housing. And when
you talk with them, they realize, oh, it's not so bad to add a few
more stories. I would happily do that if that means our teachers can
live in the community. So I think it's more, as Warren said, a lot of
people kind of sleep walking through it, having not thought their
positions out completely and who are really pretty open to it. And
when there's a building that is being proposed in San Rafael, that's
160 units, it's eight stories. It's by Marin standards huge, although
by apartment standards worldwide, pretty insignificant. But there were
a lot of people there that came up and said, we need this. This is
important to the community. And it wasn't just housing advocates that
showed up to support the project.

                   Warren Wells:
And people are starting to realize that, I think, that there are
people who are starting to realize that the current arrangement is
unsustainable. Businesses can't DAFF their coffee shops and
restaurants. So that particular project in Santafel, the Chamber of
Commerce came out swinging for it, saying, we need this to happen.
Let's get this done. It's in a vacant bank building, kind of in the
commercial quarter, and people were saying, hey, if we want our shops
to stay open, we need people who live in the area walking in. So
that's what gives me hope.

                        MGM:
So I guess the other question is, you were sharing an article, new
York Review of Books, I believe, was talking about Marin just a few
months ago. And the author was kind of keying into the idea, too,
which is like, oh, sure, these nimbies are bad, but do you really want
to just build new housing which may not be that affordable? Is this
really affordable enough? And I mean, this has been the kind of path
of people who are kind of just nimbies in the peninsula. I think it's
the path everywhere, which is like, oh, you have to stop talking about
property values, you have to stop talking about minorities, and you
start talking about I don't think it's affordable enough, because it
is very hard to say that. Yeah. New housing in a place which is
expensive to begin with is ever going to seem affordable on day one or
whatever. Is this in fact, taking hold is the main kind of trajectory,
as you see elsewhere? And if two, what do you say to that kind of line
of argument if you're trying to say it is worth building even if it
doesn't seem like it's affordable enough?

                    Jenny Silva:
Well, what I say when I hear that argument, and I do hear it often, is
we have a shortage of multifamily housing in Marin. And when we look
at these new apartments and people say, oh, but it's market rate, it's
too expensive, the reality is there is very little multifamily housing
in Marin, period. And any of that multifamily housing is going to be
more affordable than the equivalent single family home. And so it's
worth building. And it might not be affordable to the person who is
checking out the groceries at Molly Stones. But it may be affordable
to a teacher and their family. And people of Marin. Again, this is
slow, and we're in the beginning, but we are starting to see change.
But many people are seeing that their kids have no chance of living in
Marin unless they hit the lottery or they become a hedge fund manager.
And there's a lot of parents that would like to see their kids move
back. And so I think it's starting to hit home a little bit that
there's no salary in the world that their kids can make where they can
come home.

                   Warren Wells:
And this education that Chen is talking about, this is what we're
trying to do with the organization that we both are on the board of
the Marin Environmental Housing Collaborative. We're trying to help
people make that connection that they can't have all the open space,
affordable housing and low density development. We're trying to make
it clear to people, hey, do you know why your kids can't live here?
This is why. Or countering fears just around, I think, classist, or
charitably or racist, uncharitably fears around low income housing or
subsidized housing. We have a piece that we're working on right now
which is just like it's just pictures of all a bunch of different
subsidized housing developments that have been built in the last
couple of decades in Marin that just look like normal housing. And it
just kind of just try to get around this fear where it's like people
are always upset about a thing that hasn't happened yet. And as soon
as it happens, everyone forgets that there was ever a controversy.
There are people who are mobilized and professional and so dug in, who
are on the other side, who we will never convince. And then there's
just this vast, untapped middle of people who are just like who have
very kind of like, basic views about housing. Like, look at this new
housing. Look at the rent, so expensive. But if you literally again,
this is maybe too optimistic view, but in my experience, there are
many people, my parents, it took me five minutes to turn them into a
YIMBY because they're like, oh, wow, that makes sense. Cool. And I
think there are a lot of people I am optimistic about the role that
education plays in this. And if you can mobilize just some number of
those people to come out and say, hey, this is good, then it's pretty
easy to outnumber the hardcore. No, never, folks.

                        MGM:
So I suppose, personally, I wouldn't know if I call this pushing back,
but I think I become disillusioned to a degree in the peninsula of
like, oh, you need to kind of fight for a few more developments, get
your little victories. And I think when you're talking about the Palo
Alto City Council or something, you realize there's an ameliorative
effect of having a few more. But, like, at the drop in the bucket and
I think when things are so screwed up for decades and decades, we
don't need moderate fixes, we need big fixes. And that's why I've been
a lot more kind of we need big state bills. We need kind of top down
planning, like the housing elements. And I suppose the big question is
that you're really kind of visioning. It's not just, okay, let's fight
for a few more developments. But this is like regional planning. Back
in 1960, there was like, I think the Census Bureau was making
predictions of the next 60 years for different counties. And they
expected Marin to go up to from 200,000 to, like, near a million, I
think certainly over 700,000. And they just plateaued in 1965. They
just never and I suppose the question is, okay, now you're now we're
here, we're planning for the future. Should Marin get up to a million?
Should it be up to 2 million? I don't know. Is that too crayony or is
there a point in kind of imagining what is Marin? 20, 30, 20 40, 20
50?

                    Jenny Silva:
Well, I really do think we need to move our mindset from housing is
bad to housing is good. And that is what we're working on. I would
have a hard time saying, oh, we should be a million people or 2
million people. I think the Bay Area just needs to change its mind
that stopping housing is good and allow it to develop where it
develops and be a lot more willing to let things happen. But I did
want to respond to something that you said. I don't think the
education is enough. And what we're doing in terms of trying to change
the political will is enough. It does require the state laws that are
happening. But I do think this education piece is really important so
that we're not riling up the opposition to the state laws so that
people can see, oh, yeah, SB 35, that was really scary. But actually
it's good because housing is getting built. But we are way past the
time for incremental changes. We need big changes in order to solve
the housing needs in the Bay Area, in California overall. Take both of
them.

                        MGM:
I was going to say, I think that's the education, we want to make sure
you're not doing a bait and switch of like, oh, don't be afraid of
Duplexes. It's like, well, yeah, that's true, but we need a lot more
in Duplexes. I mean, earlier you're talking about Paris density, and I
think that's being a lot more honest about in this area, what kind of
density we're looking at. But I suppose that's the question. I think
educating, but also not trying to make an easier pitch, but being
honest about the real need. Go ahead, what you were going to say.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, I was just saying I don't want it to come across that we think
that we can just educate our way into any of the housing cris in Ram.
That would be ridiculous. And I think that speaking for myself,
actually, I don't know Jenny. I don't know the history of what bills
Mech has written letters of support for, but I think the state policy
that we have is good and still needs to go further. And certainly
there's no way we'd be seeing the production that we're seeing
currently in Marin without a bunch of the bills that have been
written. And so more needs to happen. But we don't we're at the state
level. Our organization is not in Sacramento. We can talk to our
elected reps, our Senator and assembly member, but we're working at
the local level and we're working to try to support the projects that
are happening and change the minds of elected so they don't write a
letter of opposition to the next SB Nine and said they're neutral or
write a letter of support or something. That's the work we can do at
the local level. As far as the population of Marin, I kind of suspect
that unless laws are written at the state level that apply very
differently between counties, whatever law would make Marin go to a
million, would make San Francisco go to 4 million. I don't know if
there's that much of it. I don't know if there's enough demand to get
San Francisco to 4 million. Marin will probably be always less in
demand than San Francisco. But again, like Jay was saying, you could
very easily double Marin's population. Again, you could double Marin's
population by building triplexes in the flats.

                    Jenny Silva:
I think you could easily double our population and people would barely
even notice.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, and then there'd be a bunch more businesses that you could walk
to. Team would be so much better from the transportation side. And
this is why, just to touch on my role in the bike coalition and why
I'm interested in the cross pollination of this work, is that you can
have a place that is fun to bike in that is not dense. Like Sonoma
County or Big Sur. That's all very nice, but a place that is livable
to bike in has to be dense. Where I grew up, in the Burbs of Maryland,
the grocery store was five and a half miles away. Even with an Ebike,
that's too far. No one's going to do that along a collector road. No
one will do that where I live in Berkeley. Berkeley bowl is four
blocks away. It's really easy to hop on my bike, put the panniers on,
drive the store, get $150 worth of groceries and ride home. And that's
because of this density. Because there is so much residential density
in Berkeley, there should be more, but there's enough to support this.
Quite a few grocery stores within a very easy biking distance. And so
this is something that I think actually I had a post on Twitter about
this maybe a year or so ago, but the bike advocacy community needs to
do work in itself to make people realize how much housing plays into
bike ability. I feel like YIMBY's get the importance of fostering
walking and biking because they understand that cars and dense
development don't work together. But so many people come to the
bicycle advocacy world. Not everybody by any means, but many people
come from the recreational side and don't understand the role that
infill housing, especially indoor commercial, which is there to
support that housing will have in making a place where living by bike
is really easy.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I think we'll get back to the kind of local work of Marin. But
as far as, like, biking goes, I think I saw some people make some kind
of arguments. This is a Matt Berning argument that as far as cities,
unfortunately, density isn't enough because the more you build densely
right now, it means the more cars you have. Like, Manhattan has more
cars per square mile than kind of a sleepy suburb. And I think there's
vehicular bicyclists who I think know what they're doing and are
fearless. I think kind of too fearless in my mod. I'm a coward. I
don't ride if there's a car anywhere near me. I think obviously you're
doing stuff to make stuff more safely. But I guess I would just love
to see that kind of necessarily go hand in hand, dense, but also
completely separated bike trails and everything.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah. And I will say Marin again, Marin is a really distinguished
place. And you really can't talk about the county as a whole. You have
to talk about, like, pieces of county. There are places in Marin,
central Marin, like Cormadera and Mill Valley, where 80 90% of the
kids get to middle school walking and biking. There are parts of it
that are incredibly walkable and bikable. It's dense, pre war, just
post war, single family housing. Or there is a bunch of pre war
missing metal in Marin.

                        MGM:
I'm guessing, like old rail stations. That was the hub back in the
day.

                   Warren Wells:
Exactly. Because Marin was built around commuter railroad, electrified
commuter railroad. People would hop on the train, take it to Sausito,
get on the ferry, go to San Francisco. And so in this central southern
Marin, all those railroads returned to bike paths. And it's really
easy to get around kind of like off street or on very pleasant
neighborhood streets in Cormidira, Mill Valley. And I don't think that
I think you could add twice as many people without adding a ton more
bike car interaction in some of those places. In Nevada, which is all
postwar development, it's the northernmost city in Marin, that's a
much more challenging environment. It's like very wide streets, on
street parking on every street, multi lane roads, really very little
bike infrastructure. That is a place where if you added a bunch of
density, they probably would be adding a bunch of cars. That's kind of
the challenge.

                        MGM:
Of like, where do we focus having that? I don't know what the I don't
see many kind of visions of fixing postwar developments that seem
like, oh, yeah, that's going to work. Because honestly, it just seems
so hard.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, it is hard, I guess, just to be, again, maybe too much of an
optimist. You look at Davis, what they did in the 70s was start to
just build a bunch of side paths. And this is actually Davis is like
the origin story of the Vehicular cyclists because they didn't want to
be forced off the road because they thought, oh, we'll be going too
slow on these side paths above the curb. So let's fight that and stick
on the road where we belong. And so kind of where Davis? zigged like
the rest of California, zagged and then we see the results. Davis has
all these separated bike paths that are that like the the roads might
be wide, but if you have a place to bike above the curb next to the
road, people will do it and you see just massive bike share in Davis
compared to the rest of California.

                        MGM:
That's fascinating.

                    Jenny Silva:
I do want to make a plug because various cities have done it. And I
know Rotterdam is very famous that they were completely car dependent
and they've pretty much kicked the cars out. But closer to home,
Seattle, I saw an incredible stat that they grew their population 20%
and traffic went down largely because of the bike commuting that they
put in place and some transit.

                   Warren Wells:
A lot of that service.

                    Jenny Silva:
Yeah, but it can be done. And I think in Marin, there's just so much
room to improve the bike infrastructure. I'm in Sausalito and I walk
down bridgeway all the time and I'm like, this could be so much
better. It could be so much better and so much safer if we took some
of that car space away and converted it to bike space and reduced the
speed. Nobody needs to drive 45 miles an hour down the street in
Sausalito, but they do.

                        MGM:
I don't have a whole lot of reference for Nevada. Is Nevada like cul
de sac land up there?

                   Warren Wells:
Not quite. It's kind of half in habit. It's actually fairly gridded.
But again, all the collector streets are like four lanes with a
median. And on street parking on both sides, it's larger lots, like
probably like maybe 10,000 foot lots or something like that. 10,000
square foot lots. It's not like total suburb. Cul de sac bill, but
it's like just a step more urban than that.

                        MGM:
I don't know if anybody's ever done it, but it feels like there's
obvious ways to fix cul de sacs through pedestrian walkthroughs and
bike bike throughs I don't know. Has it ever been done at scale?

                   Warren Wells:
Because it seems not that I know of. And the interesting thing with
Nevada, again, you have these challenges, these sort of conflicting
challenges. Challenges and opportunities. Nevada has the right of way.
The public rights of way are so wide you could just do a protected
bike lane on every street in Nevada and all of a sudden it'd be just
much more bikeable. But instead they choose on street parking on every
street in Nevada. And so that's just like a question of political will
and money. They're running a deficit every year because problems that
are the case across California is prop. 13 years have these broke
cities with wealthy people, but the cities themselves are broke. But
that's my job is to try to convince people to recommend the members of
the public and the councils that govern the cities that a better
allocation of space would be one that actually lets people have
choices. Other than driving everywhere, which today, driving
everywhere in Nevada is the obvious choice because doing anything else
again, I speak as someone who rides a ton. I don't like riding on a
busy road with no bike lanes like no one wants to.

                        MGM:
Okay, enough about bikes for the moment. Let's go back to housing. So
your orgs, have you been active on the ground as far as housing
elements and other work? As far as that goes and if so, yeah, just
kind of get into kind of what that looks like, the work you've been
doing.

                    Jenny Silva:
Sure. We've reviewed every Moran jurisdiction housing element and
provided comments to the jurisdictions themselves and to HCD and we're
really pushing that they try harder to get housing built. So we've
commented on the sites when we have specific site knowledge and we've
commented a lot on the policies also and to upzone more broadly and to
just allow more housing to be built. I really have an issue with the
general strategy of the housing element, which seems to be to pick
specific sites and just upzone those and try to reach your arena
numbers that way. I would really like to see the state push that
cities up zone more broadly. There's no reason that 80% of the
residential land in Marin should be single family homes.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I mean, it seems like at least the cities I paid the most
attention to their housing element site inventory, it is very much of
where can we scrape together sites so we don't have to touch
residential? And especially if you're talking about a place that does
have obvious place of residential, which is around like transit hubs,
they will do anything, at least a lot of places out there, they'll do
anything to avoid upzoning single family homes near a transit center
and boy, and they'll say, oh, let's tear down this community center.
Let's tear down all these supermarkets and stuff people need, because
it's not good. And I suppose there's an answer for this. HCD should
flunk them. I think they should. And the question is, are they, I
guess how far are you with housing elements up in Marin? Are you up in
the flunking stage. Has anyone flunked?

                    Jenny Silva:
Well, so far the only housing element that's been certified is
Sausalito, which is a whole nother story on its own. I would say all
of us that have been watching it have been very surprised that that
was the first one that HCD passed. The rest of them are they flunking
them. HCDS required them all to go through other rounds. There are a
few housing elements that are close. San Rafael, I think, is very
close. Marin county is very close. Corda madeira, I believe, is close.
And I think those well, Sam Rafell and Cordo Madeira specifically, I
think, had pretty decent housing elements. The other ones are all at
various stages. Fairfax just submitted their first draft to HCD
earlier this month.

                        MGM:
So talk more about the SAUS lido.

                    Jenny Silva:
One, the sauce lido one. That was really a travesty in my mind, and
I'm still surprised that HCD approved it. It was not a good site
inventory and it wasn't a good site inventory, and the process was a
joke. The aspect that Sausalito is most famous for is the underwater
sites that they had on the site inventory. HCD responded that those
sites weren't necessary to have a passable housing element. The
reality is there was very little buffer without those sites. And even
without that, an election is required for half of the sites that are
on that housing element. And Sausalito really hasn't put in a decent
alternative if the election doesn't pass. And that, to us, was the
most fundamental issue. If the Sausalito residents don't believe
there's any consequence, if they don't pass this ordinance that allows
the housing to be built, they're going to turn it down and the housing
won't get built. So we're really, really disappointed that HCD
approved that.

                        MGM:
Yeah, and I think we talk about surprise that HCD doesn't approve. It
makes it like HD is a monolith. I mean, I've been kind of hearing
whispers and stuff like how this works behind the scenes and it sounds
like they're definitely it's a house divided. They have people over
there who really are like housing cops in the good sense. They really
want to bust heads of bad cities. And some people, you know, are
either very complicit or just don't care, incompetent or whatever. So
it's a luck of the draw of what kind of folks you get on the case,
which is, yeah, you'd hope there'd be a rubric, it'd be like a lot
less discretion, but unfortunately, no.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, because each city just gets assigned a reviewer, I guess. Is
that your understanding? This is my understanding. Sounds like one
guy, and they might be either more stringent or less.

                    Jenny Silva:
So, yeah, that is the case. But I will say the Sausalito reviewer has
been a lot tougher on some of the other Marin jurisdictions.

                        MGM:
Overall to me. I mean, it's one of the first places when I first
visited California, I saw as part of just like tourist stuff. We're
going to school here. But it seems like a theme park more than like a
real city. It's just tiny. I don't know, I suppose you can always
throw more stuff. It doesn't seem like a real place. It seems more of
just a tourist hub.

                    Jenny Silva:
There are people that live there.

                   Warren Wells:
It's like 8000 people or something. There are small cities. Well,
yeah, it wasn't always a small city. They had this time during World
War II. I don't know. There are people who live there. I know a bunch
of people live there. Jay lives there. It is certainly a place that it
is a tourist hub. It's a place where people go to. It's the place
where people visit in Marin if they're going to one city.

                        MGM:
Right. I guess to me the future should be either it becomes a real
city and you build high rises, you build a ton of stuff in Oslido or
it becomes governed by the Fisherman's Wharf Authority and it's just
like they take it over as a little theme park or something. The fact
is, like, it's technically a city, but it isn't. This is kind of
goofy.

                    Jenny Silva:
It is interesting because if you attend the city council meetings in
Sausalito, there are a lot of residents that are really upset that
there are not more businesses and services in Sausalito that are
serving the Sausalito community. But if you look at it, on any given
day, there's probably twice as many tourists as there are residents
there. So of course the businesses are going to cater to the tourists.

                        MGM:
Sure.

                    Jenny Silva:
So I keep saying, if we want businesses to cater to the residents, we
need more residents. We should just build.

                        MGM:
Yeah. Outmatch them in numbers. It's a battle. Talk more about
affirmatively furthering fair housing and the housing elements and
what this means and also how it has an opportunity for tenant
protections and antidisplacement efforts as the plans are developed
and how that's been working out in practice.

                    Jenny Silva:
Well, I'll start with the second one first, which is the tenant
protections. And I will say MEC, along with several other of the Marin
nonprofits have been very active in the housing element process,
ensuring that tenant protections are being put in place. And that is a
really important issue for Marin right now. There have been several
cases recently where institutional investors have come in and bought
apartment buildings and increased rents to the maximum level. We've
heard that we are a target because we do not have protections in
place. So we are pushing that very heavily right now. In terms of the
affirmatively furthering fair housing, moran is kind of weird because
we've got so many jurisdictions and when you want to talk about
affirmatively furthering fair housing in Tiberon or Belvedere, the
number one thing you can do is just allow housing to be built. It
really doesn't matter what side of town it's put on. And I think
that's the case with Sausalito too. We just need more housing. That's
going to be the number one thing that we can do to affirmatively
further fair housing.

                   Warren Wells:
Because in Miranda, it's not like this kind of setting aside like
unincorporated county and San Rafao. The cities themselves are not
within the city. The city is not segregated. It is the city's
existence kind of like separate from the rest of the bay. That is that
segregation within an unincorporated county. And Sandra Fowl, which
Jenny touched on earlier, sandra Foul is home to a neighborhood called
the Canal, another low income neighborhood that is also remarkably cut
off from the rest of Marin, again, by this time by the 580 freeway and
the eponymous waterway. That the sanitary canal in those cities. You
do have in those two jurisdictions, you do have this question of like,
well, where do we cite the housing but to everywhere else, like
Tiberan or Belvedere? It's just like, you just got to have more
housing here.

                        MGM:
Yeah, but I was thinking when I was talking about Marin City, it's
like, oh, they're piling on the housing there. It makes it sound like
housing is scary and bad. And I do think if you're putting all your
pressure on just the most marginal communities, I think that's a
gambit to raise land values in a place that is going to be bad. I
mean, that's authentically what the gentrification looks like when
people just get outpaced by the land values. But one, it's a matter of
having better balance. I think there is certainly no harm in building
as much you can in the most rich areas on down even basically have the
cut off median income. Have they cut off 30% and above? I mean, I
think as long as you're not exclusively on the bottom end, it's pretty
safe. But on top of it, sure throw all the tenant protections out of
displacement on top of it too. And we're getting the state level. I
guess the question is at the local level, what is that looking like
for tenant protections? Is this going to outpace what you're getting?
AB 1482?

                    Jenny Silva:
It's really interesting. Fairfax actually recently implemented the
most stringent tenant protections in the state, and I think everybody
involved in the passage of it would say it went a bit too far. And
because of that, the landlords have really gotten traction and riling
up a lot of fear about it. And at this point, it's really getting a
bit crazy. There appears to be quite a bit of institutional money
that's going in to fight the tenant protections there. And Fairfax is
another tiny town, kind of similar to Sausalito. I think it's 7000,
8000 people. And so you would think institutional money could care
less if there was tenant protections in Fairfax. But what we're
hearing is that they see that as a toehold and they don't want it to
take form. There are apparently all sorts of TV ads playing in Fairfax
against it, mailers going out to all the residents, a lot of
misleading information that's happening in an attempt to turn it over.
And it's almost certainly going to be on the ballot now because
they've collected enough signatures. So people are really watching it
very closely, not just in Fairfax, but in the rest of Morin.

                        MGM:
Well, when you say it across the line and upset the landlords, I
always kind of treat like costa Hawkins is a pretty strong guardrail.
It's hard to go too far as far as making them inordinately upset
insofar as there's limits. I guess the question is, what did they do
that seemed to really trigger.

                    Jenny Silva:
I think there are two big issues and one much more clear cut than the
other. But the tenant protections, which is both rent stabilization
and eviction protections, apply to if you rent a room in your house
and if you rent an adu. And so if you let somebody rent a room in your
house and you're having a problem with them, you don't want to be
stuck living with them for the rest of your life. And that's something
that's really been used to rile people up. And same with adu. To a
certain extent, I feel a little better about more rent stabilization
in the adu, but if you're renting out an adu in your backyard and your
tenant is a real problem, and blasting music and not being a good
neighbor, you shouldn't be forced to live with somebody on your
property.

                        MGM:
Yeah, just cause is just cause. But I understand when it's personal,
people get a bit more timid. But I mean, I will say it is kind of
interesting when people talk about mom and pop landlords, it usually
means like, oh, anyone under 15 units or something. It's like there
are real mom and pops who are the people who are renting a room out.
And honestly, there's a lot of dead weight insofar as there's a lot of
empty bedrooms that could be rented out. And as far as it goes, we
need a ton more institutional big real apartments with real tenant
protections, I think kind of bespoke renting rooms inside of single
family homes and everything else. It's like, I could take her. That
isn't my biggest fight for tenant protection. So I think there needs
to be some sort of guardrails for everybody, including people who
aren't rooms, but they aren't the same as institutional people with
capacity. And I think it's difficult to thread that needle.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, and it seems as though, like, Jay was saying that feel how we
feel, like morally, at least from a political standpoint, the Fairfax
City Council, town council seems to have gone farther than they could
or than they maybe should have. And there's there's a big backlash and
it's gonna probably get repealed and like, who knows what will happen
to the people on council.

                        MGM:
But it sounds like this isn't like. The thing. A CAA mobilized. It
sounds like this is a real kind of grassroots like mom and pop
landlords, right?

                    Jenny Silva:
No, this is the thing that I have heard and you can't yet access where
the money is coming from, that there is a very strong belief that
there is institutional money that is going into fighting this. And
while there are a lot of mom and pop landlords in Fairfax, they aren't
all mom and pop landlords. And there have been institutional buyers
for several complexes in Marin and their fear is if they don't
overturn it in Fairfax, it will spread to the rest of Marin. What they
are pushing for is not just the repeal of this ordinance that was
passed, they are pushing that all the tenant protections beyond the
state level be repealed, which includes tenant protections that
Fairfax already had greater than the state level before this was
passed. So they're demanding that Fairfax go back further and reduce
what they had in place.

                   Warren Wells:
I think that something that people don't appreciate really, when they
think about Marin is like I was trying to find an old tweet where I
posted this, but there is a substantial amount of multifamily housing
in Marin. I think people think of Marino birthplace of conservation.
It's all single family. No, because so much development happened
before the nothing has happened since the 70s. There's actually a
substantial amount of multifamily. Like several jurisdictions, like
the city of Larksburg is majority renter. The city of San Rafael is
like 48, 52, just minority, barely minority renter. So I think that to
Jenny's point, I don't remember what the numbers are in Fairfax, but
something like 40, 60 renter homeowner. And there are a number of
fairly large buildings in Fairfax and I think that them. The second
thing, I think that people outside who are paying attention to Marin
can be excused for not knowing that Marin is kind of like weirdly
right now. A couple of cities in Marin are weirdly at the leading edge
of tenant protections. And I think that folks, some people at the
state level are noticing that at least from the realtors association,
that's interesting.

                        MGM:
I guess I just consider the anti tenant protection places in other
cities to be really clueless. In places like the Peninsula I've seen a
lot of times they just send a CAA person there to the apartments
association landlords lobby, but they'll send one person who's like,
oh, this is a bad idea, you're going to stop the incentives to build
housing. It's like you're not the people fighting for housing and the
people in city council don't really care either. But to actually find
a real wedge issue locally, which is the kind of the mom and pop
renting rooms and ADUs and if they are able to exploit that wedge
issue to peel back a lot of protections, that's actually the first
competent thing I've seen from them politically in a while. So I guess
I didn't see that coming because they seem pretty incompetent, but
that's pretty scary and I need to keep better tabs of this stuff.

                    Jenny Silva:
Yeah, I was pretty surprised when I saw the extent of what was
happening and the amount of resources that was behind the effort.

                        MGM:
Yeah. No, I'll fess up. I've been ignoring essentially everything in
Marin local news for a while. So I think it's egg of my face.

                    Jenny Silva:
I think that's pretty typical.

                   Warren Wells:
Well, because it doesn't get coverage unless you're reading the Marin
IJ, it doesn't really get coverage elsewhere. Like, I haven't seen an
article in the Chronicle about Fairfax, have you, Jenny? I feel like
we would know well.

                    Jenny Silva:
And it's so small. I think people just think, oh, it doesn't matter,
it's inconsequential. And in this case, I don't think that it is
inconsequential.

                   Warren Wells:
And there are just to kind of like to broaden it, there are also rent
control fights happening in the city of Larksborough. There was a big
council meeting about kind of like again where to set they're trying
to set a lower feeling below 1482. There's been a lot of conflict in
the council there about what number you set that at. So again, I think
that people don't know that rent control is kind of such a hot issue
in Marin in a way that I don't know if it is in other cities in
California at the moment.

                        MGM:
It flares up. I think you need a lot of local mobilization and I think
good on folks if they can get that energy a lot of places it's very
hard to mobilize folks and I suppose my general frame reference is the
more kind of suburban and kind of out of the way and expensive tenants
get demobilized. So it's surprising to see it kind of happen. Little
hotbeds.

                   Warren Wells:
And Jenny, do you know who is it who has been doing all the rent
control organizing? Because I know that there was like they have
really been like this is like last year they were getting like
hundreds of people to call into the Fairfax and San Selmo City Council
just asking them to agendize it. And that's kind of where this came
from, right?

                    Jenny Silva:
Yeah. And I don't know all the details on the politics, but I do know
that the DSA has been involved in organizing people. I know Legal Aid
and Canal Alliance have been very involved in this. But it's funny
when you talk about the organizing. I have a friend whose daughter
works at Trader Joe's after school and somebody got all the Trader
Joe's employees that are renting to show up. And I thought that was
brilliant.

                        MGM:
It's hard to mobilize people to residents, but at their workplace
workplaces are famously an easier place to mobilize people than at
their homes.

                   Warren Wells:
And again, just kind of going back to what I was saying earlier
because there is this, I think, larger share of renters in many towns
or cities in Marin than people realize. There is actually a fairly
there's a decent audience for organizing around rent control.

                        MGM:
Yeah, it's interesting.

                   Warren Wells:
Unlike some suburb where everyone owns their homes. What's rent
control? What's rent right.

                        MGM:
No, absolutely. Yeah. We've been going a bit over a bit long here, but
I think just wrapping up any other kind of pants in the stove that you
want to make sure we cover before we wrap up here.

                    Jenny Silva:
I guess the point that I always like to make and that I like people to
walk away with, marin is just an incredibly beautiful place and you
can't be here and not be blown away by the physical beauty, but as you
go around, the built environment really stinks. It is not attractive.
We have a lot of really unattractive commercial strips and strip
malls.

                        MGM:
I do love that one A and W you have up there. That's a nice A and W on
the highway.

                    Jenny Silva:
Yeah. There's a real opportunity to make it so much better than it is
today.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, and I love that Jenny, and kind of like touching on that. I
think this is the place where bike advocates and housing advocates
should do their epic handshake, is on parking reform and also
beautification advocates because so much of a remarkable amount of
Marin is just kind of paved surface parking. Like you walk around
downtown Santa Fe, how is there so much parking here? And so that's
something that we're trying to I think there's a lot of room to do
work on and education on because people are so uneducated on the cost
impacts of parking, the environmental impacts of parking and the
opportunity cost of having so much of our city be devoted surface
parking. And so actually, a post I'm working on for MEC about and I'm
going to cross run with the bike coalition just to try to do more
education about how when we do infill both housing and commercial, we
make our cities prettier and we give space for more people to live
here and more space for things for their things to do.

                        MGM:
It's never a bad time to just go to the next tier of stuff and maximum
parking laws everywhere. It's a bit pie in the sky. It's not unserious
in my mind and.

                   Warren Wells:
It'S interesting to touch on that. So there is a big master plan
development happening in Santafel right now at the Northgate Mall.
It's like a mostly morabund mall, kind of over the hill just north of
downtown Santervel. The long term plan for it is like 2100 units.
They're tearing down a bunch of these old commercial buildings like
the Macy's and putting in housing there. That said, it is right next
to the Smart station. Smart is the commuter rail line that goes from
the Sonoma Marin commuter rail line. So it's in the catchment area for
AB 2011. So in theory, they actually are required to provide no
parking there and I've had conversations with the developer because
we're pushing for some bike improvements there. And he was entirely
unmoved by AB 2011, this bespeaks the need for parking maximum. I was
like, hey, they're providing thousands of parking spaces. They're
actually adding parking because they're structuring a bunch of the
parking. So there's going to be more parking. There more spaces there
in the future than there are today, even though it'll be a bunch of
housing. And I said, hey, maybe you don't provide so much parking.
He's like, this is the suburbs. Everyone's going to drive. We have to
have parking. We can't sell it.

                        MGM:
Otherwise, it makes sense. No one ever got fired from putting too many
parking spaces. And that's the problem. That's why you need policy.

                   Warren Wells:
And they'll just charge a little bit more for the units, and everybody
walks away winning except for the people who want to live there.

                        MGM:
Yeah, you need real weirdos, courageous folks, or you need policy. And
I vote for Policy.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah, 100%.

                        MGM:
Well, one final question. Is scaling up ferries the future of Marin?
There are ferries that work at real capacity. Look at the Staten
Island Ferry. Look at Hong Kong. There's ferries that run a ton of
stuff. Could you add more, or is it just too perilous or like long of
a voyage or whatever?

                    Jenny Silva:
There used to be two ferry terminals in Sausalito, and now there's
only one. Seems to me like you could have a lot more going on. You've
probably looked at it more than I have, though.

                   Warren Wells:
I don't want to get out over my skis.

                        MGM:
I'm just kind of curious. Just like imagining Star Trek. Future Marin.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah. But then this is kind of like still thinking about Marin as a
bedroom community for San Francisco, which I hope we start to move
past. Like, we should have more jobs in Marin and there should be more
housing in San Francisco. Can choose where they want to live, but I
don't think we should be just thinking about, oh, we should be
facilitating this kind of just as mono directional commute. Obviously,
ferry service is really great as, like, a regional transportation
system because the water is there and it would be hard to build
another train line over the Golden Gate Bridge. As someone who doesn't
own a car, I really look forward to a future where I hope for a future
where ferries are more frequent than every hour and a half because
it'd be much easier to get around the bay.

                    Jenny Silva:
Yeah, my husband and I actually took the ferry to dinner in San
Francisco a couple of weeks ago, and we realized that the last ferry
back was at 730 or something like that. So it was totally useless as a
mode of transportation. We had to Uber home, which seemed a little
beside the point.

                        MGM:
Yikes. But with that said note, I think let's wrap up here. It's been
a pleasure to talk and yeah. Thanks for dime.

                   Warren Wells:
Here, Mark.

                    Jenny Silva:
Thank you.

                   Warren Wells:
Yeah. Thanks so much having us, Mark. It was a pleasure.

                        MGM:
Perfect. We have been talking to Jenny Silva, Warren Wells, all about
Marin County. You can hear this episode and all previous episodes of
this radio program at the website seethecat.org This is a presentation
of KZSU Stanford.

