                        MGM:
KZSU Stanford, 90.1 FM. I'm Mark Mollineaux. This is the Henry George
Program, a show all about land, policy, and politics. We're here in
2024 and starting off with an episode about a housing elements. We're
taking a deep dive into the state housing planning apparatus. And who
better than Kevin Burke: housing elements watchdog, housing elements
whisperer of East Bay For Everyone to take us on this journey, we'll
be talking about how this process has been going from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction, getting to issues such as fair housing provisions. We'll
talk about what everyone wants to hear: builders remedy, and even talk
a bit about land value. Without further ado, let's just get to it. So,
Kevin, thank you so much for being here today.

                    Kevin Burke:
Thank you so much for having me. I'm excited to be here.

                        MGM:
Yeah, so this is not the first time we've talked about housing
elements. We've talked about how housing elements have been incubated,
a lot of the process, you know, some of the watchdogging down in
southern California. But one, it's a big issue. I think it's worth
going back to this, again and again, because it's an interesting
example of state planning: what is California trying to do to make
housing happen? And two, there's been a lot of interesting updates,
both as far as what's happening in northern California. And builders
remedy wasn't even a thing a year and change ago. So I guess just
introduce yourself and talk a little bit, what got you, specifically
into the world of housing elements.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. So professionally I work as a software engineer and I guess I
got interested in sort of housing both through: it just seems like a
lot of the issues in this area kind of boil down to the housing know
both personally, like my friends and family can't afford to live in
the Bay Area. And kind of from a public policy perspective, it just
makes every problem so much harder if you can't hire middle income
workers because they can't afford to live here. And then going to
meetings in San Francisco and realizing the crazy things that people
were saying at public hearings. But yeah, how I got interested in
housing elements specifically is I thought they were a really useful
lever for shaping public policy and sort of influencing public policy
because the penalties for not having a compliant housing element are
pretty severe. So cities are paying a lot of attention to it and the
state's paying a lot of attention to it and there aren't a lot of
opportunities to personally be able to add hundreds to thousands of
housing units or not that you're directly building them. But changing
zoning in such a way to make those units possible to build, if you
were going to do that directly, financially, you'd need tens of
hundreds of millions of dollars. That's a pretty neat way, I think, to
have a lot of impact on housing in California is how I saw the
opportunity.

                        MGM:
Yeah. What's the 30 second pitch for people who may not be familiar?
What's your elevator pitch for housing elements 101?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. So every eight years, the state requires every jurisdiction in
the state to show that it has basically the capacity to add a set
number of new homes. And so this number changes for each city and
county. But basically the city needs to show that it has the capacity
and that it has sites where people are going to build those. And so
the problem is that cities are not really interested or incentivized
to try very hard at this. And so that's where kind of, if you're an
advocate, if you can point out the flaws in city's plans, you can
force them to submit better plans and actually have a more realistic
chance of getting the housing built in the numbers that they say they
tell the state that are actually going to get built.

                        MGM:
And to clarify, this isn't new. It was rolled out like 1980 or so.
Actually, I'd be curious with the first cycle, what was the
motivation? Because it's weird that they made these happen. You must
have a housing element, but then they just kind of honor system, just,
"have fun out there", because they didn't matter at all for better
part of 30 years.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, absolutely. I think it's kind of this weird. So this is the 6th,
we're going through the 6th cycle, which depending on where you are,
is like starting in 2022/ 23 and ending in 2030, 2031. But yeah,
there's kind of this weird, like kabuki theater where the state
doesn't want to directly say that it's trying to build housing or add
housing. And so instead they use this kind of indirect mechanism of
telling cities, okay, you're responsible for planning this many new
homes, you're responsible for planning this many new homes. And then
the cities kind of have more control showing it where the homes are
going to go inside of the city. And generally this hasn't really led
to good results in the past for a few reasons. One is the cities don't
want to build housing at the rates that the state wants them to build
at. So they've in the past submitted a bunch of infeasible sites.
There's a really good LA Times article by Liam Dillon focused on
Foster City. That kind of covers--

                        MGM:
But I feel like that's a more recent thing. Kind of in the past they
wouldn't even, I guess, did they always have site inventories or has
that been adapted? Because I feel in the past they can say whatever
and they would just like, first, in the past, the overall numbers were
far less. And then two, they just wouldn't do it. They just would say,
oh, we did 5%. Oh, we tried really hard.

                    Kevin Burke:
Right.

                        MGM:
We'll do better next time. Which is, yeah, I mean, there's nothing
there. At least now, reading all these housing elements in this
current cycle where one, they have higher requirements and there are
actual consequences through several different policy levers which we
can get into, I'm reminded of nothing so much as just like, insolent
teenagers doing homework or something. It's so many people trying to
fudge their numbers, trying to get away with stuff, and it's just this
weird back and forth, back and forth. But yeah, I mean, as you talk
about fake site inventories is something we see. We talked about this
down in southern California. But yeah, I think just tell people again,
what does it mean when someone kind of fakes that kind of stuff?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, I mean, you're kind of right. If you go back and look at the
first housing elements, it'll be like ten pages or something like
that. And then now you go and look at a housing element. There's like
600 pages of evidence. And I think part of that is the state sort of
demanding more evidence. And part of it is the laws have kind of
changed about what sort of things you need to submit as part of your
housing element. The consequences of submitting a fake site inventory.
So let's say I'm like an average size city. You could say I'm like
Danville, for example. And I have--

                        MGM:
That's a town.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yes. And I have 40,000 residents and I've been asked to add 2000 new
homes by 2031. And so I might allocate those to a bunch of different
sites in my town and say this site is going to build 200 apartments
and this site is going to build 50 apartments, and this site is going
to build ten apartments or whatever. And we're going to add this many
adus and all those together kind of add to 2000. Plus you're supposed
to add a little bit of buffer because accidents happen and the buffer
is entirely insufficient. But that's another story. So the issue is if
you submit fake sites, basically, like you're getting away with a
lower sites inventory than otherwise, you would be submitting. Right,
if half of that inventory is on fake sites. And realistically, you're
looking at adding about 1000 homes instead of 2000. So the game for
advocates is to try to disqualify as many sites as possible in order
to sort of try to concentrate higher levels of development on the
feasible sites. And that can take increasing base densities or sort of
triggering rezonings on feasible sites. For example, in Lafayette,
they were trying to count their Bart parking lot in their site's
inventory. And our argument was essentially around the site is not on
BART's plan for sort of where they're building housing in the next
decade. And also it has a contract with a solar panel developer.
There's solar panels on top of the site where they'd have to pay $3
million or something to get out of that contract. And so we were
successful at basically disqualifying that site. And I mean, they were
counting on like 800 units on that site. So as a result of that, they
had to reallocate those units to other sites in Lafayette and increase
the base densities there.

                        MGM:
Yeah, it'd be nice if BART could move quicker and redevelop all their
parking lots. But as we see in North Berkeley, it's unfortunately slow
mostly. I mean, it seems like it's mostly a probabilities game. In the
past, I think you mean for at least cycles in the past, as long as you
get your numbers up, they rubber stamp it. But now it's like you have
to multiply every one by what's its probability? And if it's like
something is a 95%, yeah, that's basically a one for one. But you
could have everything from like, oh yeah, flip a coin, and then you
have to have twice as many. But if you find like really dubious ones,
that just won't happen. That should be discounted essentially to 0% or
close to it. I noticed here, like you were talking with unincorporated
Contra Costa County and your letter was recommending because they need
about 8000 units and you were recommending 40,000 or so, basically a
five times multiplier. That's basically giving a 20% probability. Do
you think a realistic, or is this how to do with these specific
context of--

                    Kevin Burke:
It depends. Realistic in what?

                        MGM:
Or you just make a maximalist demand just because it's better?

                    Kevin Burke:
If you go back and look at like for example, in the last housing
elements and people have actually done these and there are various
kind of tools online that you can look at that sort of show this, but
I mean, it's about that percentage, right, which is about 20%, where
you say in the fifth cycle, if you said a site was going to turn into
housing, maybe about 20% of the time it did.

                        MGM:
So big cities, small cities, suburbs, 20% is pretty good across the
board.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. I mean, the other thing that you see a lot of times is that
sites that aren't on the inventory become housing, because this is
kind of like an imperfect exercise. Sure. So their guidelines are
basically like, assume an 85% conversion ratio or like 15% buffer, and
that's just like way too high. When you look at how many sites people
are allocating in the last cycle, and you look at some of the specific
sites, we had a conversation with someone at HCD where basically we're
saying a lot of these sites, cities are submitting are just complete
junk. And what this person said was, well, look at the Fry's in Palo
Alto, which they included. And even though it was like a healthy
business, Fry's. And then, oh, they went bankrupt, and now it's
turning into housing. And this was their argument for saying basically
like, well, we should accept cities when they submit any kind of junk
in their site's inventory. But a more realistic approach would be to
say, okay, let's assign a probability that fries goes bankrupt to,
say, 3% to 5% or something like that. And then you multiply the number
of units you could get on that site by 3%, and then you count that
towards your inventory. And so if you did that, you could include a
larger number of sites at a much lower probability. But in reality,
what a lot of cities are doing is just throwing in bad sites and
saying that there's an 85% chance that they're going to become housing
if they were trying to actually hit the numbers. And then the other
issue is kind of the lower income numbers, where if you look at the
targets, they assume about 45% of every new home is going to become
offered to lower income residents. A much more realistic numbers,
around ten to 15% when you look at new housing. So the way to sort of
hit your lower income targets is to massively overshoot the market
rate. You get ten to 15% of those at lower income and you can actually
hit your lower income targets.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I think getting the subsidized or directly or indirectly
subsidized tranches, I think that's a much more difficult thing to do.
And I think we'll get into that kind of. I'll earmark that. But yeah,
as you're talking about the 15% buffer, it's kind of treated as like,
oh, yeah, that's just good practice, but it seems like that's not
empirically backed up. And then on top of it, people are not even
hitting that. A lot of places are squeezing in under 1% and I think I
read that Danville just, like, missed their target. They're under it,
which is. Are they going for partial credit? Like, what are they doing
there?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, so, I mean, the buffer is just a guideline. All you have to do
under the statute is just identify sites for 100% of your arena.

                        MGM:
But if you. Not 100%, if you only hit 95% of it, do they not just
flunk you out of the gates?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, they should, and they did in Danville's case, but, yeah, so
Danville, basically, the issue there was they circulated a draft where
the lower income targets just didn't add up to what their lower income
RHNA was. The way that they dealt with this is they assumed that they
changed the assumptions about every single project to just increase
the number of lower income units on each site. So, like, a site that
had 100 units, and previously they said 25% of these are going to be
lower income. Now all of a sudden, they're saying 33% of these are
going to be lower income in their newer draft. I mean, it's all just
completely made up.

                        MGM:
Well, if you cook your books, shouldn't the numbers add up to be
correct in the end? It's weird to cook your books, and it's not adding
up.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yes, but it's a way to cook your books that, like, HCD accepts.

                        MGM:
Okay. I don't understand why they couldn't actually hit their total.
If you're just lying, it shouldn't be hard to.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. So anyone's site, in theory, a lower income housing developer
could buy it and develop lower income housing. The reality is that the
funds for those sorts of projects are pretty limited, and we're still
probably, I don't know if I had to guess, around 90% of homes on the
market are being produced at the market rate. And so then with market
rate, you get basically, like 80% to 90% of the units in a project are
going to be market rate. And then you get some number of units offered
at inclusionary, what's called, like, inclusionary zoning. So you get,
like, 10% to 20% of the units at sort of below market rate or lower
income housing.

                        MGM:
Yeah, kind of. This is a pet peeve, which is at least it's a trend,
which is a lot of people whining about. I mean, I'm thinking
specifically about people in San Francisco. They whine about hitting
their new market rate targets, saying, well, "last cycle we exceeded
our market rate targets. We did badly on subsidized." And there's,
like, two different responses to this, which is just the fact that,
well, now you have to do more. They had 30,000 last time. It's 80,000
this time. So it's over two times as many. It's like, okay, you hopped
over the hurdle last time. Let's see if you can do this taller one and
then two is they're saying, okay, it's like, the problem is a lack of
subsidized. And as you're saying, one strategy, and really the main
strategy is you get subsidized units by having a percentage of new
build through IZ of market rate. So it's like, okay, well, if that's
your strategy, you need to build a *lot* of market rate, or you need
to find novel and different ways to build only subsidized, which means
you'd need to find all this revenue. And the people who whine about
the market rate are never serious about this. At least I never hear
people talk about, here is my plan to build only subsidized? I don't
know.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, so there were people in San Francisco who are throwing around
numbers. Like, the state should give us $40 billion or $50 billion.
Yeah.

                        MGM:
If the state just gives it to you, that's great. Yeah.

                    Kevin Burke:
I mean, that would be just for San Francisco alone, that would be like
a third of the state's budget or like a quarter of the state's budget
for all purposes. Right. Not even, like, housing. The amount of money
that spent on housing, that's, like, all of the money that goes to
every education system. And so, like, yeah, if you want to give a
quarter of the state budget to San Francisco to build affordable
housing, yes.

                        MGM:
You can build all of, like, I guess you have two choices. You can
either build your subsized units by also building market rate at huge
quantities, or you can bankrupt the schools. These people market rates
so much, they'd rather bankrupt the schools.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. I mean, it's just an artifact of the RHNA targets are just an
artifact of people basically looking at RHNA numbers and then saying,
oh, well, we should propose higher, lower income because it's more
important. Which is like, that's reasonable. That makes sense. But it
also leads to this sort of distortion where the percentages given to
each city don't match up with the percentages that actually get
proposed in project developments. And so you end up with this sort of,
everyone overshoots their market rate or gets closer to their market
rate goal than they do their lower income goal, just as the nature of
the way that works out.

                        MGM:
And I could see if a place is a poorer, disadvantaged city that is
kind of helpless. It's like, oh, "we're more of a ward to the state.
Please, you need to give us funds." But San Francisco is a rich. And
the thing, too, I hear this the most. San Francisco gets my hackles
up, but Beverly Hills claims this. And I say again and again, you're
rich. If you really care about subsidized units so much, you can raise
the revenue and build it, but you don't. I don't know. It's like this
weird, simultaneous helplessness, but just unserious. I don't know. I
think the cynical read is just, this is just a bunch of creating a
distraction to say why you can't just build new housing. And I think
that's the correct read, but I don't know.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, so one of the sort of most promising legislative fixes to come
out of sort of working on this has just been. I feel like the most
effective would just be to triple or quadruple the market rate. RHNA.
And then I think you just have fewer places to hide if you're a city,
because you need to rezone a lot more parcels. And then also, there
wouldn't be so much nitpicking over individual sites because
individual sites wouldn't matter as much. And the other thing is that
would also sort of insulate you from complaints about, oh, we overshot
our market rate and we undershot our lower income. I don't know how
politically feasible that would be. But there certainly solve a lot of
the kind of problems that we're seeing with sites, inventories, and
the sort of RHNA process.

                        MGM:
Yeah. Personally, I'm not the hugest fan of IZ, just as far as it's
like a weird break you're putting on the new housing. I'd rather find
different ways to, I think, decouple it. I mean, I do like the per-
building integration to some degree. I don't know. I feel like
decoupling it instead and just having a big fund full of, here's your
subsidized funds instead of. I don't know. That's another question,
too. How far are your subsidized funds going? We have all these
different countywide measures, but the money doesn't go that far due
to different reasons. And I guess it's good to have the numbers,
because it's like a target for number of units, which is the important
part. But if you're just failing at doing it, unlike the market rate,
there aren't the same penalties. But I don't know, it's tough. It's a
historically big problem. How do you build subsidized units in big
quantities? And it's not easy.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, I mean, the other issue that people don't really talk about is
that it sort of shifts enforcement to all of these different apartment
owners. If I have, for example, a ten-unit subdivision, which I live
in Walnut Creek, and there are a fair number of these. So now you're
doing one unit at below market rates, and so now you need to be
responsible for income verification and policing and making sure that
this person isn't like renting out the unit. And I mean, you've seen,
even in San Francisco, which in theory has the resources to do
something like this, a lot of their subsidized units are just vacant
because of various sort of difficulties with administering the
program.

                        MGM:
How do you get on? Do you have a billion different queues? A lot of
times you do. It's like, if you're looking for affordable housing,
it's like, first you need to find out, how does this work? Then? What
are the million pieces of paperwork I need to do to apply for a
million queues and then wait for seven years at least? I don't know. I
don't think you can look at the end like, this is good for people. And
I'd say, like, the people who actually are, like, look at our
politician class. How many people are living, in deed restricted,
subsidized units? Essentially zero. And I think it's a sign that we
consider, "oh, it's housing for others." I think if we had more people
actually deal with these headaches, we probably would remedy some of
these headaches, but it's kind of a tangent. So here's the big thing.
Housing elements are incredibly exciting in, I think, some of the
larger scale--, at least it's how we're doing business right now. And
it's nice to see all these cities whine, but I think you're dealing
with Alameda County, Contra Costa county over in the East Bay, and
also East Bay for Everyone is dealing with San Francisco too, because
why not? But there's so many cities between the two of those. You're
talking about 35 cities, cities and towns. And I don't know, it feels
like I've been keeping track myself in, like, Palo Alto, I've spoken a
few times mostly to taunt them, because I feel like, I think a better
process than seeing compliance is seeing them screw. But how do you
deal with all these different. There's too much going on, too many
deadlines. I'll just be honest. I feel overwhelmed and confused. Does
your workflow just actually mesh with us pretty well, or how do you
deal with the chaos?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, it's a good question. So we've tended to focus on jurisdictions
where sort of regulation is a bigger barrier to getting housing
approved. And so this tends to be the more exclusive jurisdictions.

                        MGM:
So places that you are not looking at would be, for example?

                    Kevin Burke:
Well, like, lower income. I mean, like Antioch, for, like, we did not
really look that hard. Okay.

                        MGM:
You did have mean. But I think in particular, we were.

                    Kevin Burke:
Looking at, like, Rockridge, we were looking at kind of missing
middle, because the issue in Oakland, I mean, you'll see this again
and again, and kind of housing elements is they were concentrating so
much of the new development in sort of the lower income east Oakland
areas and less in the hills. Not that they should be putting
everything in the hills, but, like, every neighborhood should have its
part and more around their downtown bar stations than less around
Rockridge. And Rockridge was downzoned in 1970 in response to an
affordable housing development that went in there. And so a lot of our
sort of efforts went around sort of explaining the historical context
to hed and trying to get those reversed. I mean, we were massively
successful doing that, and we ended up getting a really strong missing
middle program pass, which is now implemented, and also rezonings in
Rockridge, which got passed there. And then in Contra Costa County.
It's a lot of the housing, a lot of the cities on the 680/ -24
corridor. So, like Orinda, Lafayette, Walnut Creek, and then
unincorporated Contra Costa County, which is Alamo, and pockets
throughout and Danville have kind of been the cities that I've been
focusing on in particular. And in terms of workflows, it's really
hard. Basically, I kind of just track this a lot by email. So you try
to sign up for everyone's email distribution list, and then they're
basically required to send out emails when they have a new draft for
review or when the city council is reviewing something. And so then
you get those and you kind of circulate. And we collaborate a lot in
slack with other people on our team to say, here's what we're sending.
Here's our notes on this draft that come in. The other thing is that
you can skip a lot of kind of the documents. So it's 600 pages, but
you don't necessarily need to read 600 pages of everything. The really
big things to focus on are like the sites inventory, the constraints
section. So the constraints section is like here are all the different
ways that we make it hard to build housing. So we impose parking
minimums and then you have to build parking in addition to the
housing. Or we set a height limit of 30ft or we set zoning restraints
that will permit a maximum of ten units per acre. Right. Or we have
minimum lot size rules and so they're supposed to write all these
down. So that's another thing you can ding cities on is like you're
not analyzing these constraints properly. Here's a constraint that you
didn't analyze and then the other one is programs, which is like your
programs are supposed to fix all the things in your constraints
section and make it possible to achieve the housing. We've been able
to get some pretty good programs in, in a lot of different cities for
things that they're supposed to do to facilitate sort of housing
development.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I guess you have kind of like the distribution of how you're
trying to set up housing within your district. And then there is the
overall hurdles that apply to any single parcel. I think those are
both interesting. I think the overall hurdles, it's nice to fix it
there. I mean I think it's nice if we fix that at the state level
because a lot of these bad policies should just be stripped away at
every single juncture. Again, I mean I don't follow the East Bay
stuff, you know, closely and you know, kind of at a very top level
familiar with a lot of these jurisdictions. But I guess my main
experience is Palo Alto and I can see these sins come again and
example. I mean I think this is probably a running trend in most
places. You talk about where are you going to put your new housing?
And to like if I were the God know, doing this in Palo Alto, I would
say around the two Caltrain stations it should look like Hong Kong, it
should go very tall. And they've done something in their downtown, on
University, but on their other one there is a place like Old Palo
Alto, I used to live in ADU there, and it's old bungalows, small
little things, they're all really expensive now obviously. And they
didn't touch this at all. This is a walk from a Caltrain station and
they say oh we're looking for new sites, this doesn't get touched.
Instead they put sites up by the highway on former industrial sites.
They're looking to tear down retail centers. To me, it's not like I
feel like, oh, we need to preserve all retail centers as it is in
places. They're looking like, oh, we're going to tear down the
McDonald's on Page Mill. It seems to be like that, people eat there. I
would rather tear down a bunch of, and make dense a bunch more
residential areas. But places, in my experience, they don't touch the
residential areas. Is that a pattern that you'd see in most of these
places or any places actually touching the residential centers?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, absolutely. It's absolutely a pattern. And it's really
unfortunate. I mean, it's just very kind of silly is that when you see
kind of these big bills come out like Senate Bill 50, which would have
rezoned everything around transit kind of by. Right. And the pushback
from all these cities is local control. We know best where housing
should go. Trust us, we're going to do it. And then they put up these
plans where all of the housing is kind of concentrated around big car
thoroughfares and away from kind of transit in ways.

                        MGM:
That are going to not even thoroughfares like the way Palo Alto is
tucking them in industrial areas that are so. And people have done
this in the, like Mountain View has done better in the past, but I've
done flyering and knocking doors in townhouses built in old industrial
centers. And you realize it because you have to walk 2 miles to get to
transit anywhere.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, so, I mean, the explicit guidance that Danville Town Council
gave staff at the start of this process was keep everything away from
single family zones. And that was kind of their overarching
consideration in where to kind of identify new sites. But yeah, you
see this just again and again, like in Contra Costa County, basically,
in Contra Costa County, it's a collection of unincorporated areas. So
North Richmond is an industrial zone. Crockett, Rodeo, Bay Point, all
of these are sort of lower income. All of these have higher
populations of minorities, have worse schools, have worse pollution,
and then you have kind of higher income, higher white populations,
better schools, less pollution, places like Alamo and Saranap and
Kensington and even Discovery Bay. And basically a disproportionate
amount of the site's inventory is going into the lower income areas
with more minorities. Every map they put in in Contra Costa county
looks like the same map. And the state has these guidelines, which,
thank goodness, they're finally kind of pushing back on this and
saying these new laws that pass around fair housing, and they say
basically it's not fair to do this. Right. We're not giving people an
equal shot at having opportunity. Right. If you talk about the people
who are going to be moving into these new apartments, a lot of them
are going to be putting the kids in worse school districts. I mean,
personally, I think it's a lot easier to keep a good school know and
have it accommodate sort of more students in a lot of cases, prevent
enrollment declines, which is one thing that you see a lot in the San
Juan Valley than it is to take a bad school and sort of transform it
into a good. So I think that's just like really unfair that they're
doing that. And so finally, this cycle, this state has kind of tools,
some tools to push back on things like this. Unfortunately, it is.
But, yeah, I mean, this pattern of kind of disproportionate, let's put
stuff in industrial sites, let's put stuff in more heavily polluted
areas, is unfortunately pretty widespread.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I guess it seems to me like maybe it's harder to quantify
because there is, as you say, the fair housing, the AFFH requirement
as part of this process. And maybe I was a bit naive, but I thought,
oh, like Palo Alto doing it this way, this alone will cause them to
say this is a fair housing. Think they're, it seems like they're not
really saying that not touching single family housing in areas that
should be changed is enough of a fair housing violation itself. Or how
does that.

                    Kevin Burke:
Mean? The issue with the fair housing, the way that the fair housing
guidelines came about is the Obama administration put out these fair
housing guidelines at the federal level that didn't end up getting
implemented. And so someone took those and said, well, we can just
implement these in California. So then they basically adopted those
for California, passed it, signed into law, and there's a lot of good
stuff in there, like you're supposed to analyze sort of like patterns
of access, historical segregation. Things have led to segregation.
Like in Lafayette, for example, the town was 99% white in 1960, and
13,000 people moved to Lafayette between 1960 and 1970, and it was 99%
white in 1970. So they've never had a similar number of people move.
So, I mean, you're looking at huge numbers of white residents at a
time when segregation was through a number of formal and informal
methods enforced in know it'd be harder to get a loan. If you were a
black person in Lafayette, your realtor probably wouldn't even show
you houses. Not to mention a lot of these homes and subdivisions might
have had something in the CCNRs that says you can't sell this house.
To a black person. In 1968, they voted to incorporate. In 1974, they
passed a general plan that reduced the density on a ton of different
sites in Lafayette. And so this is kind of the context. And today it's
like an 80% white suburb. A ton of white people moved in and then they
basically voted to downs on the town. And since then, it's pretty much
stayed really white. They've never had a chance. There's never really
been an equal opportunity for black people to move in. Since we've
sort of reduced the de facto segregation levels and sort of lending
and showing people apartments and home sales, this is the thing that
they're trying to reverse. This is the thing that cities are supposed
to analyze. The problem is that the guidelines, they're kind of like,
you need to explain what you're going to do to remedy this. But
they're not really quantifiable for understandable reasons. But the
problem is that makes it really hard to enforce versus something like
the sites inventory, where the law for sites inventory is basically
like you are supposed to show. If you're talking about a non vacant
site that's something with any kind of store like business or
apartment on it, you're supposed to show substantial evidence that the
existing use will discontinue. Right? That's what the law says. It's
literally a text of the law. So that's really clear. The city needs to
show substantial evidence that this use is going to discontinue. So if
you're saying a preschool is going to turn to housing, it's like, show
me evidence that this preschool is listed on LoopNet or something like
that.

                        MGM:
You create a betting market if you want to. That's an actual claim.

                    Kevin Burke:
Sure.

                        MGM:
As opposed to segregation, like segregational end. How do you
adjudicate that in the end?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. So developer sent a letter of interest. So that's really clear
guideline where fair housing is much more sort of vague. And so
similarly, the remedies. How are you judging whether this is an
appropriate remedy for fair housing or not? Right. So a lot of it has
sort of come down to the discretion of people at HCD and sort of what
advocates are pushing for. I will say we've had better than
anticipated results. Honestly, I've been grateful for how much HCD is
willing to push back, but at the same time, it has been kind of
frustrating and it has been a little bit inconsistent, city to city,
in terms of what cities can do and what cities can't. Like Orinda, for
example, they made no changes to single family zones. Right now it's
legal to sell in Orinda like a $4 million mansion. That's 6000 sqft.
But if you wanted to build three 2000 square foot triplexes, you could
not do that. That doesn't really make sense to me from a fair housing
perspective in terms of who can afford Orinda and sort of increasing
the amount of affordability and the number of people that have access
to opportunity in, you know, Walnut Creek, we were pretty successful
in getting a program to reduce the minimum lot sizes in. That's.
That's something that I hope HCD will look at and legislators will
look at in sort of future iterations of this process.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I'm thinking more about like just the quantification part
because I feel some, you can talk very broadly about kind know fair
housing in the abstract. If quantifying it, there are ways to do it. I
mean, you can quantify racial segregation to a large degree. There is
data on race populations in different areas and also geographies, I
suppose, making that actionable. I worry if you kind of tie it to
outcomes, if that will kind of run afoul of race. Quotas are generally
not looked upon well in the law. And if you say you can't be
segregated white, I don't know if that's going to be kind of an issue.
There are ways to kind of look at things that correlate highly with
that, or just class stratification. Where are different people at
different income levels living? And if you do it that way, you don't
have the same race issues. And it seems like it's a pretty good, if
you're seeing a bunch of concentrated high income people, you're
probably dealing with something that is either downstream of past de
facto segregation or just is working to be or de jure segregation and
is working to kind of be de facto segregation. On top of that. To look
at one thing, and I always pointed the title of this show, a lot of
this stuff is exhibited in the form of land values. If you are putting
your site inventory on low land values, that's a bad sign. In your
city, there really should be something like a reasonable ratio of
number of people dwelling on a certain value of land. High land value
should have higher numbers of people and vice versa. And I don't
think, again, it's harder to do this because we don't actually assess
parcels in California as often as we should. But I think we probably
could look at that and kind of say, yeah, it's give a mean. I'm just
kind of looking at ways you can kind know, give objective grades.

                    Kevin Burke:
Exactly. Yeah. So, I mean, we've proposed in Contra Costa County, for
example, like a number of tests that we think are reasonable for sort
of evaluating fair housing. The mixed use densities in the higher
income areas, are they equal to the mixed use densities in the lower
income areas? Right. Or do you have, like, for example, if you're
proposing 100 units an acre in Bay Point, you should be proposing 100
units an acre in Alamo, single family rezones. So what densities?
Basically, the way that this works is when Contra Costa County was
first built, like all of Alamo and Danville was zoned for
agricultural, with a minimum half acre lot size. And so then later
that was turned into basically like, what's called the r-20 zone,
which is like a minimum 20,000 square foot lot size. And that zone
just does not exist in lower income parts of the county at all. And
so, I mean, that fact is just like massively unfair. So you can
propose whatever development standards you want for the r 20 zone, but
just its existence.

                        MGM:
Where are the gentleman farmers supposed to live in the low income
places?

                    Kevin Burke:
Right. It just does not exist in Crockett. Right? There's no r 20 zone
in Crockett or Rodeo or North Richmond. And so, I mean, what we're
saying is, like, if you're sort of going to rezone these lower income
areas for seven to 17 units per acre, which is a pretty common single
family rezoning that they're doing now in these lower income
communities, you should also be identifying similar numbers in the
higher income communities and rezoning those for seven to 17 units an
acre.

                        MGM:
I do wonder. This is kind of a question which is looking at different
areas. I can make examples in the peninsula, compare Palo Alto, Los
Altos Hills. But I'm guessing if you compare, like, Rockridge to
Alamo, I mean, I might be off base here, but Danville is kind of, I
think, on the same. Like, what is the difference between kind of city
core, transit connected areas and bedroom communities, which are kind
of badly sited? Some places are rich, but also they're, like, distant.
And I suppose if you ask me, should Palo Alto be as dense as Los Altos
Hills? I would say it should be denser. Los Alto's Hills is. I mean,
if you really ask me, I think it should be depopulated. It's like,
it's know, rich jerks living in the hills on giant. It's like if you
build towers there, it's very hard to get people to the rest of the
area, as opposed to literally Old Palo Alto, is blocks away from
Caltrain. That should be where your towers are. I guess that's a
question. Is Alamo, like, kind of a badly attached bedroom community,
or does it have connectivity?

                    Kevin Burke:
So it's a good question. I mean, it's funny how much history I've sort
of learned about this area as a process of doing this, because you
really need to understand the history to sort of figure out why things
have happened and sort of where we're in this place that we're in.

                        MGM:
Most people only know it because Steph Curry lives there.

                    Kevin Burke:
Right, right. Well, he moved to Atherton when they moved to San
Francisco.

                        MGM:
Yeah, because he was part of that whole letter thing, too.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. Wow.

                        MGM:
He hits all the great places.

                    Kevin Burke:
But, I mean, Alamo has, like, tens of black residents in a community,
so he and Draymond Green deciding to move there, like, significantly
increase the black population in Alamo, which is really unfortunate.
So, I mean, the history of Alamo is that it had a railroad running
through it, which is owned by Southern Pacific Railroad and was
freight only and ran from Pleasant Hill all the way down to Pleasanton
and got bought by the East Bay Parks and Recreation district in 1980
and turned into the Iron Horse Trail. So, I mean, there's no reason
why you couldn't have ran past, derail there and set up stations and
done everything. And it was also initially targeted by Bart Highway
680 for heavy rail right down the middle of the freeway there. And
then that was opposed by residents of Alamo, residents of Danville,
residents of Santa Ramon, who said, we don't want our communities to
change, and we don't want new development that's going to come from
having a barge station in our town. And so that's why those plans were
shelved. So, I mean, there's kind of like a circular argument here,
which is we can't have more density because we don't have good
transportation networks, but then also, we can't ever get good
transportation networks because we don't have good density. Right. If
you look at the density that you need to have a decent bus connection,
it's higher than it is in Alamo, but you could build apartments and
then run a County Connection bus, and that would make the bus a lot
more effective.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I guess there's, like, different levels because, like, Atherton,
where he moved to, that's another case that was on Caltrain, and they
ripped out the station, you know, which is just abhorrent, whereas Los
Altos Hills and like Hillsborough, objectively, they never had
transit. They've always been just rich jerks. But I'm sure the Iron
Horse trail, it was sold as railbanking, and I'm sure they'll take a
withdrawal any day now and actually put rail back.

                    Kevin Burke:
I mean, so, like Walnut Creek, for example, they took the entire right
of way and turned it into South Broadway, which is this really kind of
silly, almost two mile long road with no left or right exits that
duplicates an existing road on South Main. But the parcel is probably
like 50 acres. You could have imagined, like a big park space, open
space, tennis courts, any number of sports fields that you wanted.
Instead, they thought, well, the best way to use this former train
track right away would be put in a new road and some sound walls.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I'll say. I'm always of two binds with bike trails out of old
railroads, because in theory, you could bring them back, make them
dual use or something. But then I think the biggest issue is, okay, in
almost all cases, you're going to have to widen it, at least in some
areas. And just getting that acquisition of the right of way is, like,
disastrously expensive. I don't know. I think it shouldn't be, because
I don't know if this is kind of an abstract issue about, like, in my
dream world, a land value tax. I think that you would say they kind
of, along that corridor, you should tax it higher in someone's
backyard that abuts it, like the back end of your parking lot. You
should actually kind of like. Are you sure you want that back end of
your want? Wouldn't you rather give it back to the city?

                    Kevin Burke:
I don't too. You know, even having a bike trail existing, they could
be doing a lot more to facilitate sort of access. I mean, like a lot
of the properties, Walnut Creek is a pretty good trail network. Not
just the Iron Horse Trail, but also they have canals running through
it, and each of the canals has a trail running next to it. But I mean,
the properties along the canals, they don't have a right of way that
opens onto the trail, the bike trail. All the entrance and exit from
your property is to the road. And so that's the thing that you could
address with a code. You could say if you're building a new house, it
needs to have bike access, like a concrete ramp and a gate leading
down to the trail, so that we can sort of facilitate using these
networks that we have. But that doesn't exist, unfortunately, right
now.

                        MGM:
That's another thing. I feel like on the dream world thing, better
public acquisition would allow cities to have, like, let's create a
cut through in all these areas right now. If you have bad cul de sacs
and things that aren't well connected, they are never remedied. Well.
And I don't know, maybe, I guess in theory, that could be part of kind
of a larger city, transportation planning, and maybe it will be out of
self interest eventually, but right now, it could be pretty dismal in
a lot of places.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, definitely.

                        MGM:
But that's kind of a side thing. So your general take is even places,
even a lot of places that seem to be not well connected, it might be
worth it to really put their feet to the fire and say, no, sorry. And
also, we want to have you remedy the transportation networks you
should have had or not disinvested in.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yes. Broadly, yes. And I think the other thing is that all of our sort
of wealthier areas are in a lot better position to deal with all these
problems than our lower income areas, who don't have the resources. So
just as an example, the other thing is that a lot of times, they're
not even trying. So a lot of the complaints. Alamo. So Contra Costa
County submitted a draft housing element. So this is an example. Kind
of like, when I talk know, we've asked the county to analyze just all
of the inequalities exist. I mean, here's one is, like, when the
county submits a new housing element, there's a group called the Alamo
Improvement Association. And so they mail every single Alamo resident
with every single site in Alamo that's on the housing element, and
they know, here's where to send your comments. Send them to Candice
Anderson, the county supervisor. And they don't say yes or no, but
it's, like, pretty clear which way they want you to go. And so as a
result of the comments that were submitted on the housing element,
there were maybe 80 comments, and 65 of them were from Alamo
residents. And Alamo is maybe 10% of the total unincorporated
population of the county. And they're submitting, like, tons and tons
and tons of the comments on the housing element.

                        MGM:
What are the dynamics? Because I know most places, I mean, this kind
of goes a lot of places you find, and you say, well, if you don't get
an order, we're going to disincorporate you. And Alamo is
unincorporated, but they seem to be thriving in their own sense within
the unincorporated county. I guess that's also a big question of,
like, what do cities gain and lose by incorporation? And what is the.
They're apparently still calling the shots, I guess, even though.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, I think the tides kind of turned a little bit now that each city
has kind of like, now that I think the RHNA mechanisms are taking into
account sort of how wealthy you are and how sort of jobs rich your
communities are and sort of access to its transit. I mean, even a
place like Danville, when you compare to somewhere like Brentwood,
it's so much closer to BARt and so much closer to San Francisco that
it sort of scores higher, even though if it's 1015 minutes down the
freeway. But yeah, I think you see this just basically anytime anyone
submits an application for new housing in any of these racially
concentrated areas of affluence, I see this over and over again. It's
unincorporated Walnut Creek, Alamo. I was looking at one in Discovery
Bay today. There's just tons of community opposition. Like, the people
know how to organize to fight these projects. It doesn't even matter
what's being proposed.

                        MGM:
People live in Discovery Bay. But it's a weird canal city.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, it's an interesting mean because it's way out.

                        MGM:
It's past Antioch, but I've wanted to visit it for a while. But what
is it like?

                    Kevin Burke:
I've honestly, I've never been, but the demographics, it's
significantly wider and significant. The median income is higher than
the surrounding communities.

                        MGM:
Are there people working like the FIRE industry? Is it similar people
that work and live in Walnut Creek or. I don't understand why it's
like Walnut Creek. That's too hustling and bustling for me. I need to
be out in Discovery Bay.

                    Kevin Burke:
You know, I think the wealthy communities, back to my point of, like,
the wealthy communities, I think, have more resources to solve these
problems. So Alamo, like, a lot of the complaints when you go and read
through all these letters are school pickup traffic is bad,
specifically around Rancho Romero elementary, which is right on the
main kind of thoroughfare through town, which in Alamo is called
Danville Boulevard. And then it changes names as you go to different
towns. And then you go and look at it and you look at how people are
getting to school, and it's probably, I'd say 80% to 95% is like
individual parents dropping off their kids in a car.

                        MGM:
That's the thing people point to. They do like overhead photos. This
is a new thing where people have a weird caravan of single family.
It's a drive through, dropping off your kids, and that didn't exist
decades ago. It's weird.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. So, I mean, no wonder you're upset about traffic is because you
have this incredibly walkable, bikeable location. It steps from the
Iron Horse Trail and 80% to 95% of parents are doing pickups every day
in a car, which means that the traffic is going on to adjacent side
streets and it's going on to the main thoroughfare. And it's like
every day, 03:00 and 08:00 in the morning is kind of a disaster. And
then you say, well, what are you actually doing to mitigate this? And
the answer is nothing. The county is doing nothing. They say it's the
school district's fault. The school district is doing nothing. They
say that everything outside of the school facilities the county's
fault. And I mean, if you look at, for example, it's funny to mention
Palo Alto, but if you look at Palo Alto, they have an amazing program
for this and they've been focusing for decades now on safe routes to
school and investing in making sure that it's safe for every kid to
get to school. And as a result, the mode share for private auto in
Palo Alto is under 50%. So that means that more than 50% of all kids
at every single level at elementary school are walking or biking or
taking the bus or carpooling to get to school.

                        MGM:
I will say it's good, but also bleak dimension of that because Palo
Alto is still so car brained that they're talking about one know
because they need to redo all the Caltrain crossings. This is really
off topic, but I just want to very briefly, Churchill cuts through
Caltrain. So it's either they have to just cut it off, they can make
it bike only, pedestrian only, they could just cut it entirely or they
could build a very expensive car tunnel. And people are saying, oh, we
need the car tunnel because if we don't have this, everyone's going to
have to drive so much further to drop their kids off of school and
everyone should be able to walk to school in Palo Alto. That's absurd.
But people are still car brained. We're getting late in the episode,
but I think I just kind of want to talk about what everyone wants to
talk about. The sexiest part of all is builder's remedy. I guess
builder's remedy is when you miss your deadlines. Question one, are
all the deadlines closed in northern California? I can't really keep
track of where everyone is and also what is a deadline versus what is
an extension. What is the status of everywhere you've been seeing? I
guess you can talk about your places, but are most of them either
failed or flunked at this point, or passed or flunked.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, it's a good question. I think about half of the jurisdictions
are in compliance and half of them are not. And so, I mean, it's not
just, if you're not in compliance, it's not just builders remedy.
There's also a number of grants that are tied to sort of housing
element compliance, and those are grants for affordable housing and
grants for transportation. So, for example, MTC, which is kind of the
Bay Area, overwhelming transportation authority, had some grant money
to give out. Walnut Creek applied for and got $7 million worth of
grants from MTC that relied on the city having a compliant housing
element by December 31. And so they got that. But I was kind of
pressing people starting in January of this year and saying, we need
to be trying harder to hit this deadline. I live in Wallen Creek,
which I'm saying, you know, I don't think we're on pace to hit this
right now. And finally, after a lot of teeth pulling, we kind of got
something that was successful.

                        MGM:
But, yeah, withholding funds for affordable housing seems like really
unlikely to upset the people who are segregationists living in rich
neighborhoods.

                    Kevin Burke:
Right.

                        MGM:
But transportation funds, I could see how that. Does that actually
motivate people in your experience?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, to an extent. To an extent. I think the builder's remedy is sort
of the bigger penalty.

                        MGM:
It certainly seems to be scaring people. It scares the worst people in
ways that I appreciate, as opposed to the other stuff.

                    Kevin Burke:
So we've seen some people are kind of quiet about their builder's
remedy stuff. And you see a lot of things where people are submitting,
basically like a one page sheet of paper that says, here's my proposed
builder's remedy project. And then once you submit that, you have
basically six months to submit an actual application. And so people
are submitting a thing that says, here's my, I'm just doing this to
vest my developers rights, which is like, even if you get into
compliance, I still have this valid application from when you're out
of compliance, and then you have six months from that date to actually
go forward and pay all the fees and submit actual renderings and plans
and everything else that you need to do to get a permit. Yes.

                        MGM:
So that's a question I have. Okay, let's go back and just very
quickly. 30 seconds. Builder's remedy. Go explain what it is.

                    Kevin Burke:
So the builder's remedy is if you don't have a compliant housing
element, the law says anyone can submit an application of any density
on any residential parcel in your city. As long as 20% of the units
are affordable to people making lower incomes, you can build whatever
you want. And so in theory, this should pave the way for kind of like
towers and places where there's high demand that's being constrained
by the zoning. In practice, developers are kind of herd animals, and a
lot of them are scared of retribution and are scared of political
blowback, or they live in a community and they don't want sort of
blowback, or they think that staff has significant power to sort of
hurt their other applications or slow down their other applications
through sort of exercising their own discretion. And so they're kind
of been reluctant to use this in a lot of ways.

                        MGM:
People have always said it, developers are too pro social, they're not
antagonistic enough.

                    Kevin Burke:
The other thing I would say is there are some unanswered sort of legal
questions around this. So unless you have the stomach for a protracted
legal battle, especially on a project by project basis, where if
you're looking at almost certainly going to the California appeals
court, maybe to the Supreme Court, that's several years being added
onto your timeline. So unless you're proposing something that's, like,
immensely profitable and the profits can help fund your legal battle,
something like this 17 story building in Palo Alto, a lot of
developers aren't necessarily looking to have that fight.

                        MGM:
Yeah, it'd be interesting to take odds. What is everyone's percentage
they think of this stuff is going to get built because you have to
kind of multiply your profit margin by that ods, that it's going to be
struck down somewhere. I don't know, 25%, 40, 60. I don't know.

                    Kevin Burke:
But I think the best strategy is kind of a political one. So you
submit one project which says this project complies with the zoning,
and it may make the neighbors unhappy, but I'd like to build it. And
the zoning says that I should be able to build it. And then you submit
a second builder's remedy project for like twice or three times the.

                        MGM:
Yeah.

                    Kevin Burke:
And you say, if you monkey around with my application too much or make
me know years and years of neighborhood meetings, then I'm just going
to do the builder's remedy project instead.

                        MGM:
That's what they did with the mall Valco down in Cupertino. They
basically had their real thing, and then they had their kind of work
taking the SB 35 short circuit, and that helped them get back. Let's
go back to the negotiating table and do it the right way. And, yeah, I
think that's a really good point. But, yeah, I think, as you're
saying, there's hurdles to doing it. One is it has not been tested, so
there's large scale statewide challenges in court. And these are
moving along. I think I just saw, there's news today that it seems to
be looking pretty good that it will be upheld. Like, this is broadly
valid, but there's site specific lawsuits. Sequa, the Environmental
Quality act allows environmental impact reports, and if you're not
part of an existing impact report for a kind of existing zoning,
you're open to lawsuits there. And it can cost a lot of money and a
lot of headaches to be compliant with that. So I guess there's two
different avenues for lawsuits alone.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, definitely.

                        MGM:
And I suppose the third thing, this is actually something you wrote in
your cron article, is that you can still impose higher, essentially,
impact fees, I guess, for sewer infrastructure and stuff, too. And I
guess it kind of surprises me because it feels like, how do people not
exploit that and just impose arbitrary impact fees to kind of stop it,
I guess? Does this have to be compliant with actually some sort of
standard for infrastructure impact fees for sewers, et cetera? It
seems like that's actually kind of dangerous.

                    Kevin Burke:
There's kind of two different angles looking at this. So one is,
unfortunately, the way the state law kind of works is like someone
proposes doing something bad, like in Berkeley saying that students
are pollution, and then the state law comes up to prevent cities from
doing the bad thing. And you saw this again and again with adus, but
kind of, there aren't enough sort of builders remedy cases or sort of
established kind of law to fix the bad thing. On the flip side,
though, because this is so rare, you can't oppose a fee after an
application has been submitted, and because Atherton, for example,
doesn't have a multifamily zone, they might not have thought to write
down here are impact fees for multifamily apartments, because
multifamily apartments are illegal in our.

                        MGM:
If you have stuff on the books, you can throw it at them, but it'll be
very suspicious and difficult to get away with if you have a new
impact fee or something.

                    Kevin Burke:
It's not legal to do that after you submit an application, right?
Because it's kind of like the double jeopardy thing or whatever,
right, where you can't invent a crime for someone to be accused of
after the fact.

                        MGM:
I was wondering that has that effect with existing laws, too. For
example, let's look like SB 330 for no net loss. It seems like. Well,
that's essentially an impact fee for working off a parcel or it's not
an open slate. There are certain regulations, but those are already on
the books. That's interesting. Okay, cool. It does make me wonder,
because I always think about new forms, like no net loss or something,
for example. Like no net loss for different cultural institutions or
something. That'd be interesting. But it is interesting. I guess if
you're doing that, you can't retroactively protect stuff. You have to
get ahead of the curve.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah. Though, I mean, for historical preservation, its own can of
worms, where a lot of times suddenly people become interested in a
parcel's historic qualities only because someone has proposed doing
something actually, like, interesting with it.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I think it can be a very ad hoc. If you want to oppose housing,
I am on the books. I support preservation for protecting cinemas. I
think we know net loss for cinema screens, but that's my own kind of
very personal hatchet. But I do agree that making it kind of general
and not abused is pretty hard. But no, as we're mentioning, there's a
couple of builders remedy things on the books being looked at. I think
it'd be interesting to look more about some of these things as they're
going down the pipe. But what are you looking out for? Are stuff going
on in East Bay? Because I've seen the ones in the peninsula. Are the
places in East Bay rich enough to justify any of these things?

                    Kevin Burke:
I think it depends right now on sort of the individual property owners
and their sort of willingness to kind of stomach this. Right. So, I
mean, if you bought some property in 1990 and your property taxes are
low and you're living on it, for example, maybe you can fund a court
case indefinitely. I think I saw one in Pacifica that sort of fit
those parameters where someone proposed building like 40 townhomes or
something, and probably they can fund a suit and they can kind of wait
out the city and get more clarity on the court cases and kind of go
forward with that application. But yeah, I think another thing is the
more that people are sort of writing about the builder's remedy, the
more you might see people taking interest in sort of submitting
applications that fit this.

                        MGM:
It's too bad lawsuits cost so much these days. We used to have a
society where people just put up nuisance houses and all this. It's
like, wow, that was cool when, I mean, just personal grievances can do
so much to make stuff happen.

                    Kevin Burke:
There are basically legal nonprofits. Both legal nonprofits and the
attorney general are sort of interested in establishing case law here.
So, I mean, we're taping this on Wednesday the 13th, just yesterday it
was announced that the attorney general is intervening in La Cañada
Flintridge, where there's one.

                        MGM:
I was referring to before about good news.

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, there is sort of legal assistance available, but, yeah, it just
takes a long time. And if interest rates are 9% and so you have a loan
on a $3 million property that's going to add a substantial amount to
your cost, you're looking almost $300,000 a year just in borrowing
costs to sort of keep that loan going.

                        MGM:
That is a wild thing. It's like, boy, if we had builders remedy plus a
zero interest rate environment, that would have been an interesting
combination.

                    Kevin Burke:
But it's kind of crazy.

                        MGM:
We're still seeing stuff in the constraints we have here. Well, I
think we're over an hour. Anything else you want to kind of wrap up
with here?

                    Kevin Burke:
Yeah, so, I mean, the thing I think is really interesting about
housing elements is like, I lived in San Francisco for a long time,
but I was still participating in the East Bay because you can be like
one of 200 people who's like standing in a queue at the San Francisco
city hall to comment on whatever the housing policy is in San
Francisco, because it gets so much know, or calling Nancy Pelosi to
ask for x y or. But, you know, if you're looking at housing, like a
lot of times we're the only people submitting comments on a housing.
Uh, and so you can kind of be like the expert. If you just take like
an hour reading through a document, you probably know more about that
document than anyone, except like five people on the planet. And you
can kind of really shape things in a positive way by taking that time
and submitting a comment, even if you don't think you're an expert.
Like, I'm not an expert. I just, like, read stuff and I say, does this
make sense? And if it doesn't, then I ask questions or I submit a
comment about it. And we've had a lot of success in sort of shaping
things and moving things in a positive direction. It is a really steep
barrier to getting started. We're obviously always happy to sort of
help have new volunteers and onboard new volunteers for doing this
kind of work. But I would encourage you to get involved because I
think this is a really powerful sort of lever for making change in
your community. And if you do have questions, please reach out. And
I'm happy to talk with anyone about this stuff. It's pretty nerdy, but
I like it because I think it's really successful at sort of helping
get housing built.

                        MGM:
One, a final question relating to that I mentioned earlier, speaking
of Palo Alto, I'd mostly taunt them because they're so distinctly
hostile that honestly I kind of just want them to screw up and get
punished because I think that's more of a chance of them doing the
right thing. But I guess that's a question. Bend or break? How often
do you think you can actually bend? People do the right thing and kind
of get better outcomes through actual reforms? And how many places, if
any, in your opinion, do you think, oh, they're past working with,
they just need to be punished or broken up or put.

                    Kevin Burke:
It's a good question because I mean, even a lot of these jurisdictions
that I've thought, I kept saying what are they doing? Because they
kept just submitting the same thing over and over again. Yeah, it was
incomprehensible and a lot of them ended up submitting really good
programs. So I do think kind of the lever of the builder's remedy and
kind of state certification is pretty substantial in a lot of these
places. I mean, San Francisco, for example, you're seeing stuff that
was just not know and there are reasons to be disappointed, but it's
been so successful. And all of the reason that this constraints
reduction stuff is happening is because of the threat of losing
affordable housing funding. And advocates working SF is a good case.

                        MGM:
Insofar as they're such a bad politics and practice, they should not
be this bad. They're stagnant and they're stuck in ruts, but they can
be reformed as opposed to like Atherton or Hillsborough or Alto, like,
I think they're honestly just an hoa for the worst people in the world
and they're never going to be better than that.

                    Kevin Burke:
I don't and that's in know if you strengthen the builder's remedy and
then half a decade from now people will be significantly more scared
and a lot more incentivized to try to hit their numbers or people be
ready on the day to submit the applications. I think this is the first
year that people have been aware of the builder's remedy and that
exists and it's been kind of slow to sort of percolate through the
community. But I think certainly in eight years people are going to be
ready on the spot.

                        MGM:
Yeah, I think this cycle is crazy. Next cycle is going to be nuts. But
yeah, thanks for the deep dive. And if people want to find you or find
more about East Bay for Everyone, Where should they go?

                    Kevin Burke:
Oh, man. We're online at eastbayforeveryone.org. I have a website at
Kevin Burke dot dev, although I don't post as much as I used to. I
have a Twitter account, but I don't post there anymore. I guess you
can find me on Bluesky or Threads. Yeah. Search for East Bay for
Everyone and go from there. Cool.

                        MGM:
Thanks for having the time. It's been fun.

                    Kevin Burke:
Absolutely. It's been a real pleasure. Thank you, Mark. This is a lot
of fun.

                        MGM:
Cool. We have been talking to Kevin Burke, all about housing elements
and much more. And as you heard at the end, we did record this in mid
December. You can find this episode and all previous episodes of this
radio show at the website, seethecat.org. This a presentation of KZSU
Stanford.

